## What’s In a Name?

A GM has many responsibilities. Among these are to help explain, teach, and enforce the rules; to rule on "grey areas" not covered by the rules; to control the flow of information between the world and the players; to play the adversaries which confront the adventurers during play; and to choose or create the setting and adventures for play. The manifold role of the GM is precisely what makes it so intimidating for new entrants — there are few people who feel comfortable organizing what is in essence a social club, and doing improvisational acting, and being a rules lawyer, and being a story writer, and so on.

The many roles of the GM have also contributed to the manifold names for the same job. One increasingly common name for a GM is "Storyteller," a legacy of White Wolf's ***Storyteller*** RPG system. However, we believe White Wolf did the craft of gamemastering an incalculable harm when it said that a person running one of their popular games was called a "Storyteller." It's a name that suggests that your primary role will be telling a story, and this mantra created an entire generation of gamers who viewed their chief job as playwright and stage director. The result: at best, melodramatic amateur theatre. At worst, entire groups turned off by a not-game with no rules. This situation has been worsened by the rise of shows like ***Critical Role****,* which are enjoyed as stories by their fans, and which create an expectation of a narrative experience rather than an interactive one.

Storytelling is indeed a function of the gamemaster, and it’s the one many people think they are signing up to fill. But it's actually just one of several functions, and – in ***ACKS***at least – it is the least important. So if not storytelling, what lies at the essence of being an ***ACKS*** gamemaster?

To answer that, we have to look to history. ***ACKS***descends from the original ***Dungeons & Dragons***role-playing game, and the original ***Dungeons & Dragons***descended from the ***Chainmail***miniature wargame. It would not be an exaggeration to say that all role-playing games descended from miniature wargaming. If you’ve never played any, miniature wargames are competitive simulations, generally with two opposed teams — say, Germany and Russia in World War II. But most miniature wargames also have a participant called a "judge" or "referee." The role of the judge in a miniature wargame is:

* To choose or create the scenario the other players will compete within.
* To help explain, teach, and enforce the rules.
* To prevent cheating and keep the players honest.
* To rule on “grey areas” not covered by the rules.
* To control the flow of information to permit “fog of war.”

Note what's absent from the role of a miniature wargame judge: There’s no conception of the wargame judge as a storyteller. A story might emerge over the course of a miniature wargame, but it does so by happenstance, as a result of the unfolding of the battle. When the game is over, a story — or, really, a fictional "military history" — could be written up. But the judge did not write it up in advance, or adjust the course of the game to have one side win or lose based on the plot.

Likewise, in early tabletop RPGs, the judges did not have a "story" for their game. They had a setting and a set of rules, and the outcome was left up to the players. The original RPG, ***Braunstein****,* which preceded D&D by several years, was explicitly an open-ended wargame, and ended up going in directions its creator never foresaw. (For more on the origins of D&D, see the authoritative book ***Playing at the World*** by Jon Peterson.)

Nor was the miniature wargame judge responsible for playing the adversary — he was, in fact, a neutral referee between the adversaries (i.e., the players). And so it was in the first role playing games; the GM was not responsible for playing the adversaries, either. In Dave Arneson's ***Blackmoor*** campaign, for instance, the players were initially pitted against each other — one of them was a vampire named Sir Fang, while another was a crusader — with Arneson serving as the arbiter. (In recent years, there’s been a resurgence of this play style, under the label “patron play,” with ***ACKS***being one of the systems most commonly used in such games.)

The foundation and first function of the GM was then, and is now, that of a judge. And for this reason, gamemasters in ***ACKS***are called Judges. At Autarch, we believe that every campaign is a law unto itself, and as Judge, your first job is jurisprudence. Going forward, we might use the word “gamemaster” to refer to general aspects of tabletop play — but when we say Judge we are referring specifically to your new role as the gamemaster of an ***ACKS***campaign.
