## Judging the Game

For those of you who (wisely) avoided going to law school, we need to offer a quick introduction to some concepts of jurisprudence. First off, a **precedent** is a legal ruling on a particular issue that judges use to decide subsequent questions of law with similar issues. For instance, if a judge is asked to decide whether a semiautomatic pistol is a legitimate weapon of self-defense, a previous ruling that revolvers were legitimate weapons of self-defense would be precedent. If the precedent is followed, it is called "binding." If the precedent is ignored, the new case is said to be "distinguished" from the old by certain new facts. For instance, the court might distinguish pistols from revolvers by pointing out that their ammunition capacity is much greater.

The importance of precedent depends on whether the legal system is “common” or “civil.” The “common law” tradition originated in Old England as a history of legal rules created by judges when deciding disputes. The judges began with the traditional customs of how matters had been handled, and then over time built up a body of law based on those past precedents. Common law generally has little or no basis in anything written, except perhaps a foundational Constitution or some scattered medieval statutes. The main advantage of the common law is its deep roots in the traditions of the people and its adaptability to areas of uncertainty. The main disadvantage of the common law is that there is no written "code" that citizens can consult to understand the laws of the land.

On the other hand, the “civil law” originated in the Roman Empire as a collection or code of statutes created by legislatures. Judges interpreted the statutes, but their rulings were not said to create law. The main advantage of a civil law system is that its citizens can easily consult the statutes to understand the laws, most of which have been created by their democratically-selected legislators. The main disadvantage of a civil law system is that citizens can't depend on different judges to interpret the law the same way each time there's a case.

Faced with a question, a purely common-law judge will look up what prior judges said when they were confronted by similar questions. Meanwhile, a purely civil law judge will look up what the most relevant statute says about the question and interpret it as he thinks best. Since each system has weaknesses, most legal systems today use a mix of both civil and common law, with legislators creating the overall framework of statutes, while judges fill in the gaps using common law methods based on precedent. Under this system, citizens can look at statutes to learn the baseline of the law, and then refer to past cases to understand how judges have previously ruled.

What does this have to do with ***ACKS***?In the intro to the Foundationssection, we noted that the foundational role of an ***ACKS*** gamemaster was that of Judge. To extend the analogy, the game designer of ***ACKS*** is analogous to the legislature; the game rules of ***ACKS***are the civil law; the citizens are the players; and the decisions of the Judge about grey areas in the rules are the common law. The process of the Judge ruling on grey areas creates precedent.

### **Today’s Rulings are Tomorrow’s Rules**

If you don’t follow your own precedents, then your players cannot reliably understand the game world they act within. That, in turn, deprives them of the ability to make informed choices, which is necessary for player agency.

To prove this point, let's illustrate what happens when precedent is ignored. Imagine that you are running an ACKS campaign. During a desperate retreat, Marcus, the party's fighter, needs to jump backwards from a standing start across a 4’ chasm to safety. Now, ***ACKS***does have rule for Jumping and Leaping:

The maximum distance in feet that an adventurer can jump horizontally is equal to his DEX score + 1d6. The height and distance jumped are reduced by 1’ per stone of encumbrance the adventurer is carrying. An adventurer must have a moving start of at least 20’ or his leaping height and jumping distance, after encumbrance, are halved. (***ACKS II***, p. XX)

Unfortunately, the rules as written assume that the adventurer is jumping forwards and say nothing about jumping backwards. If jumping forward from a standing start halves jump distance, what sort of penalty should apply to jumping backwards from a standing start? This is up to you, the Judge!

Let’s assume you decide that jumping backwards from a standard start is similar to jumping forward from a standing start, except that it reduces the character’s jumping distance to one-third his base instead of one-half. Marcus has a DEX score of 14 and 6 stones of encumbrance. Therefore Marcus’s player will roll (1d6 + 14 – 6) / 3 to determine his jump distance. Marcus rolls a 4, so he jumps (18 – 6) / 3 = 4 feet. That’s enough to cross the chasm!

Next round, Viktir, the party thief, also needs to jump backwards across the chasm from a standing start. Because you are a Judge who ignores precedent, you ignore your own ruling in the prior round. Instead, you again consult the ***ACKS II***rulebook and again note that jumping backwards from a standing start is not covered by the rules. This time, you decide that jumping backwards must require great strength as well as dexterity, and you rule that the character’s jumping distance is one-half the lower of STR or DEX. Viktir, with a DEX of 18 and a STR of 7, fails to make the jump, and plummets to his death. His player angrily demands to know why Marcus got to use one-third of his DEX while Viktir had to use one-half of his STR for the same task. After all, his character would be alive if you had stuck to precedent!

What can you say to this criticism? You could say that you're the Judge; that your word is law; and that it's your right to rule however you like on situations not covered by the rules. You could say that there is no written rule stating which attribute is to be used in resolving the success of backwards jumps, so this is completely fair. But none of these responses is likely to persuade the player of poor dead Viktir that you are a fair judge — because you aren’t.

Let’s now imagine that a couple weeks have passed, and the party’s most powerful hero, Morne, must now, jump backwards across this same chasm. Morne has both 18 DEX and 18 STR with no stones of encumbrance, so he feels confident he’ll succeed no matter how your rule. Well, you once again check the rules and again see no game mechanic covering this situation. Therefore, you announce that Morne has a flat 2 in 6 chance of falling in, but otherwise he jumps across successfully. Morne’s player furiously demands to know why he now has a 33% chance of falling in, when he’d have automatically succeeded if you stuck with either of your two past rulings. Do you shrug and say “there's no rule that says it has to be based on your attributes?

Of course not. It should be obvious that this is not a healthy manner in which to run a game. A Judge who runs his game without respecting precedent is a Judge running a game that lacks fairness, common sense, and verisimilitude. Yet it's very common when playing RPGs to experience this sort of arbitrary decision-making on the part of the gamemaster out of an insistence that “the first rule of the game is that the GM is always right!” This attitude derives from a failure to recognize that, just like a common law judge creates law when he decides a case, a gamemaster creates rules when he makes rulings*.*

Being a great ***ACKS***Judge entails applying the same rules to the same situation fairly for each player over the course of the campaign. The so-called “rules vs rulings” distinction is a false distinction. Rulings are rules and once put in place need to be treated as such.

### **The Canons of Statutory Interpretation in *ACKS***

Is there a reliable method for issuing fair rulings about vague areas in the rules? This a problem that has confounded real-world courts and judges for centuries. The best answer they’ve come up with is to follow the “**canons of statutory interpretation**,” which are a series of heuristics that help determine the meaning of laws. A thorough discussion of the canons takes about fifty pages, but fortunately judging an ***ACKS***game is considerably easier than judging a class action lawsuit. Below we offer the set of canons of statutory interpretation by which you can and should interpret the game rules of ***ACKS****.*

1. Your starting point in interpreting rules is always the plain language employed by the game designer.
2. If a rule specifically defines a term, use the defined definition; but in the absence of a defined definition, interpret the rule in accordance with the ordinary and natural meaning of the language (the dictionary definition).
3. If the rule is still ambiguous, look at the rule holistically. Terminology in a rule that is ambiguous in isolation may be clarified if the same terminology is used elsewhere in a context that makes its meaning clear, or because only one of the possible meanings is compatible with the rest of the game.
4. Judges should not interpret different terms within the same rule to mean the same thing, nor the same term within the same rule to mean different things.
5. If the literal interpretation of the words is absurd, the rule must be interpreted to avoid absurdity.
6. If possible, give meaning to every clause and word of a rule; don't assume anything is redundant.
7. Specific rules override general rules.

By applying these canons, you can resolve 99% of your rulings in a fair and reasonable manner. Your outcomes won’t necessarily be the same outcome that we’d come up with in the same circumstance, but that’s fine — your players will quickly learn how you interpret the rules, and feel good knowing that the game has a fair referee running things.
