## Requirements

All fantasy races should have at least one attribute requirement of 9 or higher. Races whose racial value mimics the Arcane value should require Intellect 9 or higher. Races whose racial value mimics the Divine value should require Will 9 or higher. Other ability score requirements are at your discretion. Fantasy races with higher attribute requirements will tend to be available for play much less often, so setting high requirements is a useful tool to keep some races comparatively rare and exceptional.

Apart from the mechanical effect on the die roll, what does it mean for a race to have ability score requirements? For instance, what would it mean to say that “all gnome classes require a minimum Intellect and Constitution of 9 or better”? There are many ways of interpreting the requirement. Here’s a few:

* G Factor: The natural floor for gnomish intellect and health may simply be higher than it is in humans. The smartest gnome is no smarter than the smartest human, but the least intelligent gnome is as smart as the average human. (Tolkien’s elves seem to just not have any weak, dumb, slow, sickly, or unattractive members of their species.)
* GNASA Dungeonauts: Gnomish culture might carefully regulate entry into the adventuring classes. Only the most intelligent and healthy applicants are able to become adventurers. Entire government programs may exist that inflict annoying gnomish tricksters on an unsuspecting host populace.
* No Gnome Left Behind: Gnomish culture might have wonderful public schools with a commitment to education and physical fitness that assures that all gnomes reach a comfortable baseline. Those that drop out of higher education end up as adventurers, obviously.
* This Is GNOMELAND: Gnomes may systematically kill the slow and weak during childhood, allowing only those capable of bare-chested war cries in red cloaks to survive. This seems unlikely, but it’s hard to know what these diminutive races are capable of.

Which interpretation is “true” is a matter of world-building, not mechanics. For instance, in my own campaign, the Auran Empire, the meaning of the requirements varies from race to race. The ability score requirement for dwarves is because dwarves simply “are” hardier than humans; all dwarven classes require a minimum Constitution of 9 because there are no dwarves with less than that. Conversely, the nigh-impossible ability score requirements for Nobirans represent the rarity of their manifestation. Nobirans are drawn from those humans who have some divine ancestry or blood, but that divine blood only manifests rarely (only when all ability scores 11 or above). The offspring of a dwarf is always going to be a dwarf with a minimum Constitution of 9, but the offspring of a Nobiran is only potentially a Nobiran.

Since the choice of how difficult to make the requirements to meet is a matter of world-building, rather than a matter of mechanics, it does not adjust the cost of the class’s racial value.
