## Adversarial Action

Let’s set aside talk of rules and story now to discuss your role as the adversary.

### The Judge is God - But He Plays Satan

Every ***ACKS***Judge is God — or, at least, he is god of the world he has created. With pen and mouse, he can raise and lower mountain ranges, bring ruin to great civilizations, change the climate, unleash catastrophes. Within the context of an ***ACKS***campaign, the Judge has powers worthy of the Old Testament. But that god-like omnipotence must sometimes be set aside, so that the Judge can adopt another Biblical role.

In Hebrew, the [word for adversary](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adversary) is "satan," and throughout the Hebrew tradition, the various military and legal adversaries of the characters are always called the Satan. The role of the Satan in this tradition is always to test the protagonists to his fullest extent, even though God, who created Satan in the first place and assigned him to this task, is secretly hoping the protagonists will succeed in overcoming these tests. Most famously, the Satan appears in the Book of Job as an agent of God, whose role is to test the faith of the hapless hero. The Satan afflicts Job with loss of family, property, and health in order to tempt him to evil, but Job only gains character in the face of this adversity.

The Book of Job is wonderfully illustrative of the relationship between your job as a whole and your specific role as adversary. As god of the world you have created, you will create various agents and use them as adversaries to test your players with various challenges. Playing as the adversary, you will test the protagonist to their fullest extent, and sometimes (playing as the adversary) defeat them, even though you (being god of the game world) are always secretly hoping the protagonists will succeed in overcoming these tests.

### Don't Make the Adversary into a God

Now that we've given you a framework of Biblical proportions, the first thing you're going to need to do is create some adversaries to play. And here's where you are most likely to make your first big mistake: You'll make your adversary too godlike, too powerful. God didn't give Satan the power to just arbitrarily kill Job, but all too often, GMs give their main adversaries the power to arbitrarily kill the whole party. The rules of many games contribute to this.

Consider Sauron, the classic dark lord of fantasy fiction, and compare him to a 20th level Wizard in, for instance, ***D&D 3.5E****.* In order to learn the name of the thief (a 1st level halfling burglar) who had his One Ring, Sauron was forced to torture it out of Gollum. He then had to have minions ride on horseback to the local village, to ask around for this fellow, and when they thought they had found him, they actually had to break into his inn and stab him with swords! In contrast, a 20th level Wizard in D&D could simply use ***Discern Location*** to find the ring, cast a quick ***Greater Teleport***to its location, and then just ***Power Word Kill*** Frodo and take the damn thing. In other words, Sauron, who was a demigod, is way, way less powerful than a standard ***D&D*** wizard of not even epic level. That's pretty problematic if you want to create a villain! Sauron is Satan, but a 20th-level D&D Wizard is God.

***ACKS****,* however, is designed to avoid such conundrums. We substantially reduced the range and utility of all detection and teleportation magic relative to other D20 games. High-level mages are still deadly — they can blast entire companies of troops and shatter structures — but there are simply no magical spy satellites that can find people, and no way for casters to safely beam across the continent to instantly destroy their foes. This allows you, as an ***ACKS***Judge, to have powerful villains that are still localized in their scope of threat.

In fact, much of the game design of ***ACKS***is intended to prevent powerful heroes and villains from transforming into super-heroes and super-villains. There would be little point to armies of troops if a single Superman could defeat them all; there would be little point to building strongholds if the average mage could annihilate them. As you tinker with the game to make it your own, keep these design goals in mind. If you add superheroic capabilities to your NPCs, you’ll be fundamentally changing the structure of the game.

If you really must have a god-like villain as part of your campaign concept, we recommend beginning your campaign with him somehow crippled at the outset. Over time his power increases, but so does that of the heroes. The early books of the ***Wheel of Time*** series did this beautifully, with a series of seals being broken, each break increasing the scope and power of the Dark One. Because of ***ACKS***’ leveling mechanic, this approach lets you build a story web where the danger from the villain scales up as the adventurers move through the web.

### The Parable of the King and Courtesan

There is a famous parable of a wise king who was concerned that his son lacked the moral character to rule. As a Biblical scholar, the king was familiar with the Book of Job, and he decided that he would test his son's character as God had tested Job's. So the king found the most beautiful courtesan in his harem, and commanded her to attempt to seduce his son. To make the test challenging, he made sure the courtesan was beautiful, and told her that if she seduced his son, she would be queen. So motivated, she used all her charms on the hapless prince, yet when she failed to seduce the prince, the king was delighted. The lesson for ***ACKS***Judges should be clear: While you might play the courtesan, you are the king. You don't really want to screw your players; you just want to test their characters.

### Personalizing the Adversaries

It seems an obvious point, but the best adversaries are people (loosely defined as "sapient creatures"). People generally find the challenges posed by other people to be the most interesting.

Of course, it's true that not every adversary needs to be a person. Dungeon traps are classic adversaries: They pose challenges that test the players' determination and cunning. Sometimes the environment itself is adversarial; natural disasters, wilderness obstacles, and catastrophic weather can all pose challenges to the players, but a campaign where the main villain is, for instance, an earthquake is likely to be an uninteresting campaign. Add an Elder Elemental Cult actively promoting the earthquake and fighting against the would-be heroes, and it gets more interesting again.

Still, even when the adversary is a person, it needn't be an enemy. An adversary just needs to be a character who poses challenges. The adversary could be a foil who serves to bring the protagonists into sharper focus. The adversary could be an ally who causes more trouble than they are worth, like Lois Lane for Superman. Or it could be a rival from the same side who makes the heroes stay on top of their game. The latter is an under-utilized, but highly effective, adversary.

In ***Capital of the Borderlands***, we provide Judges with an NPC adventuring party, “Imperial Vanguard,” that can wander the map and clear dungeons in regions near the PC adventurers. In the original Auran Empire campaign, the Imperial Vanguard was introduced by having the players arrive at a dungeon already cleared of monsters, with a bold flag planted bearing the I.V. standard outside the entrance. Because the two parties weren't enemies per se — indeed, I.V. was technically an ally to the cause — the players could not simply confront and destroy them. That made I.V. even more challenging as adversaries. Without any possibility for direct confrontation, Imperial Vanguard suddenly became a factor in the party's every decision: Where should we explore to make sure we get there first? How long can we afford to rest without Imperial Vanguard cleaning the dungeon out before us? And so on. For a long time, the monsters in our campaign were just the means to the players' end of beating Imperial Vanguard.

### Playing the Adversaries

Creating interesting adversaries is only half the challenge, of course. The other half is playing them. Playing RPG adversaries is harder than it seems. Throughout this book, we have argued against railroading players into happy endings, fudging dice to make sure the players feel good, like bringing nerf chainsaws to the Thunderdome. But it’s just as bad to go too far the other way. Especially when playing a tactically rich RPG like ***ACKS***, it's all too easy to treat encounters like wargames, with every adversary acting like a playing piece that's happy to sacrifice itself for the grand strategy. As we said earlier, RPGs have wargame roots, so it's only natural for you sometimes feel like you’re playing a wargame. This is when it’s wise to remember that the gamemaster’s wargame roots are as the neutral Judge, not as the Adversary. An ***ACKS***Judge who loses sight of this will inflict incalculable harm on a party he has totally outgunned.

For instance, he'll run opponents who'd rather fight to the last man than surrender, because the Judge wants to inflict a few more hit points of damage to weaken the party before the next encounter; he’ll run leaders who can never be surprised by the party’s tactics, because the Judge allows his villains to know everything he knows; he’ll use enemies who always attack as soon as the party splits up, because the Judge wants to teach the players “never to split the party”; and so on.

A Judge can always win if he wants to, and you don't prove anything by “beating” the players. But you do create an escalating level of antagonism between the Judge and the players. We’ve seen players ask their Judge to leave the room when they plan their strategy, for fear the Judge will cheat and use what he knows against them. We've seen players refuse to tell the Judge how many hit points their characters have left, so the Judge can’t have his minions target the weaker characters.

Conditions like these are symptomatic of a campaign in which the Judge has lost sight of his primary role as a Judge and gotten caught up in a secondary role (as Adversary).

The worst possible combination is an almost sadistic paternalism: The Judge, relishing the pleasure of beating the players, uses the full scope of his powers to create and run impossible challenges, only to then fudge the dice to let the players win; usually letting them know he fudged it so that they can advance through “his” storyline the way the Judge wants them to. This style of gamemastering was actually outlawed by the Geneva Convention as a form of torture, but the US and UK weren’t signatories to that chapter, and it continues to be practiced in some areas.

Our recommended method of running adversaries is to role-play them. When we run orcs, they attack how the Dark Ages barbarians of the north were alleged to fight: in loose waves, berserk, initially heedless of casualties. If forced back enough by stout defense, their morale collapses, and they become easy prey to be mopped up. On the other hand, when we run were-rats, they attack only if they can ambush, retreat at the first sign of trouble, and surrender to save their furry hides if need be. And when we play thousand-year old dragons, we plan carefully, move cautiously, and don't take any risks that could cost them their next thousand years.

Never give the enemies knowledge they shouldn't have. For instance, the Crusader in our Auran Empire campaign secretly wore a Scarab of Protection that made him immune to death magic. Nevertheless, an evil lich that encountered the Crusader used death magic on the Crusader, because he posed the seemingly greatest threat to the lich. The lich didn’t know that the Crusader was immune. (See our earlier notes on why your villains shouldn’t have God-like omniscience!)

Doing it this way sometimes means that the NPCs don't behave in ways that would be considered tactically correct by a wargamer who knows everything you know. Sometimes they'll surrender, even though if they'd have kept attacking, the monsters in the next room would have been able to defeat the party. Sometimes they'll run away, even though running away is just about the worst thing you can do in a battle (historically, 90% of all casualties were inflicted when the other side’s morale broke).

This approach means the players can try kooky plans that would never fool you — but might fool the hill giants. It creates a more naturalistic, “real” world. And it can even turn fights into subtle clues to the nature of the opposition. “How did the were-rats know we were coming?” is a far more satisfying query if the answer is “because Steve the Retainer is a were-rat spy,” rather than disassociated justification such as “this encounter will be more challenging if the player's ambush doesn't work.” The beauty of playing the adversaries this way is that it also frees your players to participate in the experience as role-players, rather than wargamers.
