## Is there a Primary Sphere?

There was, once. The Prime Sphere was a celestial sphere created by the Logos itself, a sphere of such enormous extent that it almost defied being termed a sphere at all. Unlike Cybele’s sphere, which holds but a single sun, the Prime Sphere carried over 70 sextillion stars. Some say that the gods of the Cosmos were birthed on this sphere, evolving from primitive lifeforms into higher entities over countless billions of years.

But the Prime Sphere was destroyed long ago in a terrible war between the Lawful and Chaotic gods in which the lives of countless trillions of mortal and divine beings were extinguished. It exists now only in the memories of the surviving gods. The Empyrean gods honor their ancestral home each time they create a pocket universe: The creatures and civilizational models they employ are all, in one way or another, descended from those of the Primary Sphere.

**Designer’s Note:** The intent here is that the Primary Sphere was our own real-world universe. It explains why so many fantasy RPGcampaign worlds are filled with creatures and cultures that resemble those from Earth’s history and mythology – it’s because the gods originated in our Primary Sphere. This assumption thus sets all ***ACKS***campaigns in our reality’s future (insofar as we know, our universe hasn’t been destroyed in a divine war). But it’s really up to the Judge. For instance, he could rule that our real-world universe is actually a partial copy of the destroyed Prime, one in which the distant galaxies are a clever *trompe l'oeil.* Or he could assume that the Primary Sphere is still in existence, and allow his ***ACKS***adventurers to visit Earth and explore our real galaxies and planets.
