## How do the Gods accumulate Divine Power?

As the Logos was once the Cosmarch, it is the nature of the Logos to seek reunification with itself; thus divine power flows easily from one creature to another, especially from a creature with less divine power to a creature with more. Worship, a voluntary act of will, can bequeath a measure of the worshipper’s divine power to the focus of his worship. Worship never bequeaths anywhere near the total of the worshipper’s divine power, merely a tiny, surplus portion created by the creature’s continued existence.

Much more divine power can be garnered by sacrificing a creature. The creature’s death releases all of its divine power at once, which the sacrificier channels to the worshipped god. The god, in turn, usually rewards the sacrificier by returning a fraction of the divine power it received. Sacrifice utterly consumes the creature’s soul, removing it from the cycle of reincarnation and denying it the future opportunity for direct reunification with the Logos.

Chaotic gods prefer to acquire divine power from the sacrifice of living creatures. Reaping the life force directly is faster, and also is brutally effective in when a new population of living creatures comes under their power. But widespread blood sacrifice is inimical to life flourishing, and the brutal practice generally results in the rapid collapse of populations under the sway of Chaotic gods.

Lawful gods prefer to harvest only a fraction of their worshipper’s divine power, and even devote some of their own incalculable energies towards assisting their leading emissaries. This practice has proved so successful that in some Spheres, the Chaotic gods have begrudgingly begun to copy the Lawful gods’ tactics and send missionaries amongst mortals to establish their worship.

The accumulation of divine power is not inherently limited to the gods. A mortal creature whose soul receives enough divine power through worship and sacrifice can become a god of the weakest sort, what might be called a god-king, godling, or demi-god, and even if the body dies it can maintain its existence. Exalted souls may actually be examples of this process. Usually such souls pledge themselves to more powerful entities in a form of deific feudalism. Others seek to be independent, but this is risky. If a godling maintains a low profile and limits itself to local affairs, it may be able to flourish, but would-be deities who seek greater power are not usually viewed kindly by the extant gods or their mortal worshippers. A rare few succeed in ascending to the pantheon of powers, but most are destroyed and their divine power seized by greater deities.
