## Urban Economics

The average income of a peasant family is between 4 and 6gp per month. In comparison, the average income of an urban family is between 25 and 75gp per month, or about five to ten times higher. However, this does not mean that most urban families are wealthy. The average is skewed by wealthy urban elites, such as bankers, lawyers, magistrates, master craftsmen, and merchants. The median income of an urban family is only 6 to 12gp per month. The median urban income is greater than that of the peasantry, but of course offset by higher costs.

### Circular Flow of Goods

To understand how these values were derived requires a slight diversion into the circular flow of an agricultural economy. Assume a simple domain with 80 peasant families, 20 urban families, and 1 ruler. If each peasant family produces 16.25gp of farm goods and consumes 4.25gp of farm goods, that leaves 12gp of farm goods unconsumed, which pass to the local ruler (960gp total). The ruler could reasonably spend 50% of his income on farm goods (including grain, meat, cheese, beer, wine, oil, honey, firewood, horse fodder, etc.) but the remaining 50% (480gp) will be spent on finer goods only available from the artisans and craftsmen of urban settlements. To get money for this, he sells the farm goods to the urban settlers for 480gp, then buys 480gp of urban goods from them. The urban families, in turn, are only spending 50% of their income on farm goods, so they must have a collective income of 960gp (2 x 480gp), with the other 480gp of income coming from the sale of their own urban goods to each other. (E.g., the candlemaker buys cloth from the clothier, who buys candles from the candlemaker.) The urban families therefore produce on average (960gp/20) 48gp each.

But these variables can easily change depending on agricultural productivity, consumption pattern, and population distribution. Given the same agricultural productivity and consumption pattern, an increase in urban population means a decrease in per-capita urban income, and vice versa. In a realm where 30% of the population is urban, urban income would drop to 28gp per month, with large numbers of “urban plebs” living in the cities. If only 10% of the population is urban, but half of consumption is urban, urban income would increase to 96gp per month.

Given the same agricultural productivity and population distribution, an increase in consumption of urban goods means an increase in per-capita urban income, and vice versa. For instance, if the nobility spends 55% of its income on urban goods, and the peasants spend 35% of its income on urban goods, then the urban families will have 2 x [ (960 x .55) + (80 x 4.25 x .35) ] 1,296gp in income, or around 65gp each. But if a manorial system develops in which the countryside is largely self-sufficient, then the nobility might spend as little as 35% of its income on farm goods and the peasantry spend nothing at all; in this case the urban families will have 2 x (960 x .35) 672gp in income, or around 33gp each.

Likewise, given the same population distribution and consumption pattern, an increase in agricultural productivity means an increase in urban income, and vice versa. For instance, if the peasant families produce 20gp of farm goods each, and consume 4.25gp of farm goods and 4gp of urban goods, then the urban families will have 2 x [ (960 x .5) + (80 x 4) ] 1,600gp in come, or 80gp each.

All of these trends would interact with each other. If a realm’s central government becomes weak and power decentralizes into landed nobility, this will tend to lead towards more self-sufficient manors that purchase fewer urban goods. That will decrease the income of the urban families, which will lead to some families fleeing the cities for the countryside, until a new equilibrium arises. Or, if a realm’s agricultural productivity becomes so high that all of its agricultural needs are satiated, then the peasantry will abandon the country and move to the city, which in turn will drive down urban income…

### Circulation of Coinage

How much coin is there in a domain, realm, or world? The economist Richard Cantillon assessed the typical coinage in circulation of a pre-industrial economy as equal to around one-ninth the product of the land. In ***ACKS*** a peasant family produces 16.25gp per month or 195gp per year, suggesting 21.6gp of coinage in circulation. We selected 24gp per family so that each family would have sufficient coinage to pay their taxes (2gp per month) annually in coin. Therefore, the amount of coinage in circulation in a realm will equal 24gp per peasant family. One-third of the value will be in gold; one-third in silver, and one-third in copper, yielding a ratio of 1:10:100 in number. E.g. the 24gp of value will actually consist of 8gp, 80sp, and 800cp. 50% of that coinage will be in the urban settlements and 50% spread throughout the rest of the realm.

EXAMPLE: A realm of 5,000,000 peasant families has (5,000,000 x 24) 120,000,000gp worth of coins circulating. These consist of 40,000,000gp; 400,000,000sp; and 4,000,000,000cp. At 100 coins per pound, the tonnage in circulation is 200 tons of gold, 2000 tons of silver, and 12,500 tons of copper. Half of that is found in the cities and towns of the realm.

A character’s capital or net worth in ***ACKS*** is typically equal to 33 times monthly earnings. A typical peasant farm produces 16.25gp per month (shared between ruler and peasants), suggesting net worth of about 536gp is associated with the farm. The 24gp in circulation associated with that farm therefore reflects only about 5% of the farm’s net worth. Put another way, the vast majority of wealth in ***ACKS***is in land, livestock, tools, etc.

**Historical Note:** Persian Empire had a population of 7 million families, so our rules would predict 168,000,000gp worth of coins – about 56 million gold, 560 million silver, and 5.6 billion copper. We know the Persian Empire conquered by Alexander the Great had a store of precious metals worth 200,000 silver talents, divided between 10,000 gold talents and 100,000 silver talents. That works out to (60lbs/talent x 100 coins/lbs. x 10,000) 60,000,000gp and 600,000,000sp. Spot on!

Meanwhile the 2nd Century AD Roman Empire had a population of about 8 million families, so our rules would predict 192,000,000gp worth of coins – about 64 million gold, 640 million silver, and 6.4 billion copper. We know that the Roman Empire had an annual product of about 10 tons of gold, 200 tons of silver, and 15,000 tons of copper, that allowed it to accumulate vast stores of metal – as much as 500 tons of gold, 10,000 tons of silver, and 750,000 tons of copper. That is enough for 100 million gold, 2 billion silver, and 150 billion copper coins. Of course, some of the silver and most of the copper was used for ornaments or tools, but the Romans certainly had ample metal for the coinage we predict.

Should you wish to create a venerable dragon that has accumulated all of the coin of an entire kingdom, you now can do so! Such a treasure will be greatly in excess of the paltry hoards presented in the Treasure Types.
