## Managing Problems and Players

Once you start running ***ACKS***or any other RPG, you will likely, sooner rather than later, see a shouting match develop. It could be between you and one of your players; more likely it will be between two players. If you’re lucky, it'll be at least thinly-veiled as in character; if you’re not lucky, it will involve a messy break-up over when he cheated on her with the elven spellsword, or worse.

Role-playing games can be emotionally charged, and unlike videogames, there isn’t the filter of a monitor and gamepad between us and the other player. What happens is in your face. As the Judge of the game, you’ll be the person who assembled the group, and one of the signs of a great gamemaster is the ability to manage and control social problems within the group you’ve assembled. Even better is to prevent them from ever occurring.

Therefore, it’s time to step away from the world of your imagination and turn to a messier world: The world of problem players, personality conflicts, and social pitfalls.

### **Player Versus Player**

Many, though not all, problems in role-playing game campaigns arise when one or more of the players is out of step with the overall social dynamic of the rest of the players. There are three basic social dynamics in which players interact in a tabletop campaign: **Collective**, **Competitive-Collective**, and **Individualist**. Each of these social styles has its own implicit rules that govern how the players behave towards each other.

The Collective play style is characterized by a “one for all, all for one” mentality. Each of the players subsumes his individual play into the greater good of the campaign. In a Collective campaign, the implicit rules are: (1) each player will create a character that fits into and gets along well with the collective; (2) each player is entitled to a chance to enjoy the campaign simply by virtue of being a fellow player; and (3) the collective as a whole will democratically make major campaign decisions, and all the players will abide by them.

The Competitive-Collective play style might be summarized as “we’re in this together, but I don’t have to like it.” In the Competitive-Collective campaign, the group has implicitly agreed to the following: (1) no player will create a character that cannot fit into the collective, though they needn’t be friendly to each other; (2) no player is entitled to enjoy the campaign except by virtue of his character; and (3) the collective as a whole will democratically make major campaign decisions, and all the players will abide by them.

The Individualist play style might be summarized as “all against all” or “every man for himself.” Here the implicit rules are: (1) each player makes his own character and decisions and accepts the consequences; (2) no player will get angry out of game at another player for actions of their respective characters; and (3) major campaign decisions will be made based solely on what the characters decide in the game.

Sometimes the social dynamic simply evolves out of a particular ruleset or campaign theme, or out of years of playing with the same group. Other times the group agrees in advance. Opinions will vary widely as to which of these social dynamics is the best. ***ACKS***can support all three types of play. Regardless of what your group’s social dynamic ends up being, social problems occur when part of the group is out of sync with the whole. What follows are some common examples of problems.

###### **Dead and Back Again**

If you've followed our advice regarding the agency theory of fun, then character death is bound to happen sooner or later. When character death occurs, it’s the players’ responsibility to decide how to handle the slain character’s gear, henchmen, and other property, while it's your responsibility to introduce the player's new character into the game as quickly and seamlessly as possible. Both responsibilities need to be handled in accordance with the social dynamic of a group.

The recommended way to handle a slain character’s property is to have it pass on to his heir (discussed in the ***ACKS II Revised Rulebook****,* p. XX). But what happens if instead the party decides to ignore the dead character’s will and just plunder him? It will depend on the social dynamic of your campaign.

* In a Collective campaign, you need to remind the players that the slain character’s will should be honored and that they are violating the agreed-upon social dynamic of the group. In most Collective campaigns, the players are running “good guys” so a gentle reminder is usually enough to put the group back on track. If the majority of the players have a problem with this, then you probably don’t actually have a Collective campaign!
* In a Competitive-Cooperative campaign, you need to ask the players to think about whether they want to leave the new character with nothing to inherit, and to contemplate what will happen if the new character discovers what has been done. That said, if the majority of the other players want to be “naughty” about looting their dead ally, then accept it and move on. The group is probably leaning into Competitive more than Cooperative, but that’s OK as long as its out in the open.
* In an Individualist campaign, you don’t need to do anything. If the slain character didn’t make arrangements to have a trusted henchman, powerful patron, or other NPC ally execute his will, that’s his own fault. It’s everyone man for himself!

The traditional way to handle the introduction of a new character is to have the party stumble upon a prisoner found left for dead in one of the next few rooms (often with a suspiciously similar class and name...). It's quick and it works. But sometimes, when the surviving characters find the new player character, they decide not to let him into the party. What do you do as Judge now? Again, it will totally depend on the social dynamic of your campaign.

* In a Collective campaign, you need to remind the players that the new character should expect to be admitted readily and probably given some gear and assistance to get into play swiftly. In most Collective campaigns, the players have created heroic characters, so this is not a stretch. But even if their **characters** are world-weary cynics with deep suspicions about the world, in a Collective game the players agreed to put the group ahead of the individual, and agreed that each player is entitled to participate, so the need to introduce and integrate their fellow player should trump in-character behavior. Again, if the majority of the players have a problem with this, then you probably don’t actually have a Collective campaign!
* In a Competitive-Cooperative campaign, you need to remind the players that the new character should expect to be admitted, but probably not warmly; the player can expect his new character to get lots of in-character questioning or wisecracks and a “show me what you can do” attitude. Still, it should be a given that ultimately he’ll be admitted to the party and play will go on.
* In a true Individualist campaign, again, you don’t need to do anything. Here the new character had better hope he’s been created with knowledge, skills, or other utility to his prospective comrades, as the players are not beholden by any social contract to be nice to him. It might turn out that the party refuses to take the new character along. In response, he might follow them to aid them and prove his worth by backstabbing them during their next fight! Of course, if they fear backstabbing, the characters might kill their erstwhile comrade.

###### **That’s What My Character Would Do!**

Imagine that a player’s old character has died, and a new character has been introduced into the group, as discussed above. Unbeknownst to his new party members, however, this new character holds a radically different alignment than his new comrades. During the party’s next engagement, he ruthlessly betrays them, leading to the death of the entire party. “Why did you do that?” a player will certainly ask. “That's what my character would do!” says the traitor. What do you do as Judge this circumstance?

If this happens in a Collective campaign, then there's been a violation of all of the implicit rules of the campaign. First, the player introduced a character who didn’t fit into the collective. Second, by purposefully getting everyone killed, the player didn’t respect the other players’ right to enjoy the game. And third, by purposefully causing the campaign to end, the player breached the agreement to democratically decide major campaign decisions. You should stop the game, pull the offending player aside, explain that his behavior is out of bounds for this campaign, and rewind. A continuously problematic player should be ejected.

If this happens in a Competitive-Collective campaign, there’s still been a violation of the social dynamic, because the player introduced a character who didn’t fit into the collective and because he purposefully caused the campaign to end unilaterally. That said, since this game is partly Competitive, and there’s a strong argument that you ought not intervene with GM fiat. I think the best way to handle this situation is to have a quick player vote — either to rewind events or let them stand.

If this happens in an Individualist campaign, then it’s possible that nothing wrong has happened. The party wasn’t required to take in the new player character, and characters aren’t required to be nice to each other. As Judge, your responsibility is to remind the betrayed players that this is the sort of game they’re playing and they agreed not to get angry out of game. However, it’s also possible that the traitor has just gone out of his way to purposefully wreck the fun, not because of what his character would do, but to get back at the party that let him die (and thus violating the proscription against getting angry). Resolving this can get complex!

The general rule when addressing the solution to the “TWMCWD” problem is thatit doesn’t matter whether the problem behavior is “actually” what the character would do. It doesn't matter whether the player is a consummate role-player playing a black-hearted villain, or just a jerk. All that should matter is whether it’s a problem.

In a Collective campaign, there’s an implicit agreement to create characters that are “one for all, all for one,” so if a player makes a character who is a sociopathic traitor, **he has created the problem**. If he purposefully chooses to role-play a jerk when everyone else has agreed to role-play nice people that means... he’s choosing to be a jerk. And the better he is at role-playing, the more of a jerk he chooses to be. If you’re running a Collective campaign, you don’t want jerks. Whether they are actually jerks or pretending to be jerks doesn’t matter at all.

On the other end of the spectrum, in an Individualist campaign, the players have implicitly agreed that it's “every man for himself,” and that they won’t let treachery in game make them angry out of game. But if one player behaves in such a way as to make it impossible for the other players to not be angry, then **he has created the problem**. For instance, imagine that in the last six campaigns, a hypothetical player named Bob has **always** played a sociopathic thug who **always**tries to kill the party when they are weak. In the seventh campaign, the party members can hardly be blamed for murdering all of Bob's characters on sight. Bob might be “in character” in his treachery, and the party members acting totally out of character in dispatching them, yet it’s Bob who is the problem.

### Player versus Judge

Anyone who has ever watched a baseball player shout at an umpire over a bad call is familiar with the love-hate relationship that players have with their pastime’s referees. The same is true of ***ACKS*** players and their relationship with their Judges. There will be times that players can get very… rowdy…with you over a particular ruling, encounter, or choice. And, as between us judges, there are times when you might have some sore feelings towards your players. At some point, someone will check Twitter while you are relaying information that warns of a trap ahead, then bitch at you when their character walks into said trap and dies. It’s hard not to be annoyed (try to remember, they’re only upset because they care).

But such happenings are minor and if you are following the guidelines in this book — not railroading your players, making clear and fair rulings, playing honestly with the adversaries, and so on — then they are unlikely to derail your play. Sometimes, however, more serious issues can arise between you and one or more players, and these can be some of the most uncomfortable challenges for any GM.

###### Theme Park Attendees

Imagine if you were allowed to choose between two vacations: a safari in Africa or a trip to Disney’s Animal Kingdom. An actual safari involves vaccinations, mosquitoes, tents, jet lag, and the risk of being eaten by lions or rabid gazelles. A trip to Disney’s Animal Kingdom involves luxury hotels with air conditioning and a carefully-controlled experience designed to give great memories. A lot of people are going to choose the theme park.

Similarly, some players don’t want an RPG world in motion with real risk. They want a theme park RPG. Now, it is our considered judgment that these players are missing out. We believe that participating in an agent-focused sandbox campaign is the most fun a player can have in a role-playing game. There are other hobbies that can afford a better theme park experience. MMORPGs, for instance, that eschew permanent character death and allow infinite chances to succeed at quests and stories, are ideal platforms for theme park play. Only the tabletop RPG can offer agency-centered sandbox play. And that’s why the advice in this book is all about creating a living, breathing world-in-motion that empowers your players with the agency to make real choices in the game.

But Autarch is unfortunately not the exclusive arbiter of fun on Planet Earth, and many people find joy in things we find boring — golf, gardening, and scrapbooking come to mind. Conversely, many people don’t take pleasure in things we enjoy, like military history, spreadsheets, or sandbox campaigns. And there is a downside to our style of campaign. With real choice comes real risk of loss — of loot, of XP, of henchmen, of a character. Some players simply don’t want that. They want the theme park, not the safari.

If you have one or more players like this, you’ll find out the first time your group experiences a terrible setback — when a beloved character dies, or the party fails to achieve an important quest. They will let you know in no uncertain terms that they are not interested in losing, did not sign up to be killed, and cannot believe you didn’t run the game in such a way as to make sure such tragedy didn’t ensue.

So what do you do?

If you and the majority of your other players are enjoying the campaign, I think the right thing to do is to be honest with the upset players: Say that you aren’t running a theme park, don’t intend to run a theme park, think a sandbox is a better way to play, and ask them to give it a chance. They might grow to like it.

But sometimes they won’t want to give it a chance, and sometimes they will give it a chance and still not like it. When that happens, the best thing to do is probably to ask the upset players to leave the campaign. If they stay in the campaign, it often creates bad blood. I’ve seen friendships end over events in games, and it’s never worth it. It’s better to just agree to disagree about what you want out of your RPG hobby.

Now, it could also be the case that most or even all of your group may decide they’d rather visit a theme park than play in a world in motion. If everybodywants a theme park, a rollercoaster, and a railroad, and you’re offering a safari, a sandbox, and a story web, you have a serious problem.

So then what? Then it’s best to run another campaign using another system. Or you can attempt to play ***ACKS***as a theme park. Who knows? There’s no statute on how to have fun. It’s what you make of it.

### The Politicization of Gaming

The reality of 21st century America is that virtually everything has been politicized. Turn on ESPN, and it’s politics. Read your FB feed, and it’s politics. And, lately, it has spilled into gaming in a big way. It’s become common for political discussions to arise over tropes in RPGs that have been around for decades.

We are not going to say that politicization is a good thing or a bad thing. There are lots of people who believe that everything ought to be made political, because allowing things to be apolitical is itself a political choice to support the status quo. Conversely, there are lots of people who believe that escapist entertainment that avoids politics can be healthy and heal divides between people of different opinions.

What we are going to say is that politicization is a big thing, and you must decide how to handle it for your campaign. There are two distinct areas to concern yourself with and a few strategies to take for each.

The first area is discussion of real-world politics at the gaming table. Your options here are to ban it or permit it. We take the view that it’s better to ban it for the same reason that polite dinner conversation used to exclude politics and religion. Politics tends to be an emotional topic and if players are from different political tribes, a single partisan comment can quickly spark an argument that can derail play and cause bad feelings all around.

Even if everyone in the gaming group shares the same political views, it’s not clear it makes the experience of playing an RPG better to talk about it. In today’s media-saturated world, political headlines hit us 24/7 on our smart phones and social feeds. It can be really freeing to get away from that, whatever your beliefs, and just play the game. And it’s a lot easier to immerse yourself in a fantasy world when you’re not thinking about the impact of tariffs on global trade.

Now, to be clear, this is equally true for table talk about pretty much anything unrelated to RPGs, especially if it’s a topic people get really partisan about. You don’t want players spending game time chatting about the latest UNC vs. Duke basketball game, or Star Trek vs. Star Wars, either. That said, if you and your players are all like-minded politically and you want to talk politics, go for it. As we said above, there’s no statute on how to have fun.

The second area is discussion of politics that arises from actions in the game. Imagine you are running an ***ACKS***campaign in which the player characters are mercenaries in ancient Rome. In that era, it was altogether customary (indeed, considered downright merciful) to enslave captured prisoners-of-war. So it’s entirely plausible, in the context of the game, for an NPC to hire the player characters to round up a gaggle of prisoners and escort them to the slave markets. But it’s entirely possible a player might balk at this, not because of anything related to role-playing, but simply because real-world slavery is evil.

This sort of situation is a lot trickier to handle — you can’t handle it by simply banning it, because the discussions will arise inevitably from in-game activity. There are three basic strategies. Because we like to make up jargon, we will call them the **Historicist** strategy, the **Presentist** strategy, and the **Bespoke** strategy.

The Historicist strategy holds that the player characters should act according to the game world’s moral values, not their own. In a Historicist campaign set in ancient Rome, the PCs would be expected to role-play as if they viewed the world the way people of that era viewed it. They’d simply escort the prisoners to the slave markets and that would be that. Your players are exploring how people very different than themselves lived and thought. That can be really freeing to some… and really upsetting to others.

The Presentist strategy holds that the player characters should carry the players’ real-world moral values into the campaign and the GM should take that into account when running the game. So, for instance, in a Presentist campaign set in ancient Rome, the PCs will have the same attitudes towards slavery that their players do — presumably as contemporary Westerners this will be one of loathing and contempt. In turn, it’s your responsibility as GM to set up a world and story web that allows the player characters to act on their attitude. For instance, give them the chance to join Spartacus’s slave revolt, or to start their own. In a Presentist campaign, your players are exploring how people like themselves would behave in a world with different moral and political structures.

Finally, the Bespoke strategy holds that the GM should build the players’ real-world moral values into the fabric of the campaign world itself, hand-tailoring the world to the players’ sensibilities. For instance, in an RPG set in ancient Rome, the GM might downplay the role of slavery in the world, so it only occurs “off camera,” or even replace it with serfdom or indenture. Or the GM might simply not set the game in ancient Rome at all, but in some alternative world that has centurions and Caesars but not slaves. In a Bespoke campaign, your players can feel comfortable exploring a world with familiar moral and particular structures.

There are pros and cons to each approach. The Historicist strategy affords the widest opportunity for role-playing experiences in worlds quite unlike our own. But most of humanity’s history and lots of fictional human futures all feature cultures with political and moral values that were downright awful. Adopting the Historicist strategy can mean your players are playing villains by today’s standards.

The Bespoke strategy can make it easier to avoid unsettling topics, but it can also make it impossible to explore certain worlds or role-play certain characters in their original format. Middle-earth is grounded in J.R.R. Tolkien’s conservative Catholicism, and role-playing Aragorn in a Bespoke Middle-earth where God-given kingship and nobility by blood are pernicious would change the plot of ***Lord of the Rings***by more than a little.

The Presentist strategy is perhaps the middle ground between the two, which can be appealing to many players. But the Presentist strategy can lead to a certain straightjacketing of the set of choices available. The players may feel morally obligated to “do something” about injustice in the game world even when it is impossible to do so.

Which strategy to adopt is very much a choice that needs to be particular to your gaming group. It’s something you should talk about in advance of the campaign and agree to with your players. If it turns out that your players have widely different opinions on the matter, it’s better to find out before you launch the campaign. It may well be that some players may be incompatible with the strategy you’d like to adopt, or with each other for any given strategy.
