## Using the Campaign Rules

There are three broad ways that you can make use of the campaign rules. First, you can simply treat them as rules of thumb or guidelines for activities that you otherwise handle in a narrative fashion. This is a good option for low-level campaigns, where the PCs are spending the majority of their time dungeon-crawling, the range of campaign play activities open to the PCs is limited, and the time horizon of game play is short.

Second, you can implement the Campaign Play rules in full but behind-the-scenes. With this option, it becomes your responsibility to translate the various choices that the players describe into the appropriate activities undertaken by their characters. For instance, if a player says “since we have a few weeks to kill while Marcus recuperates, I’d like to spend the time holding court for my domain, giving the peasants a chance to air their grievances,” you can translate that into the Administering Domain activity. This can be a very immersive experience for the players, but puts the onus on you to track and manage all the complexities of the system. It is a good choice for mid-level campaigns, where the PCs are still predominantly focused on adventuring but do have the opportunity to explore a range of downtime activities.

Third, you can share the Campaign Play rules with the players, with an invitation for them to master the complexities of the system and decide what specific in-game activities they would like to do in each game day, week, and month. This method allows ***ACKS***to be run in a wargame-like fashion, and is ideal for high level campaigns with significant domain play and possible player-versus-player action in “patron play.” It can even be used for 1:1 timekeeping play in distributed campaigns.

Don’t let yourself get overwhelmed by these rules. They’re there if you need them, not there because you must use them from session 1. In general, we believe it’s easier to ignore a sub-system you don’t need at the moment then to create a sub-system you do need in the moment. So remember the guiding philosophy of ***ACKS***- every campaign is a law unto itself – and get some campaign play going!
