## Step 12: Name the Realms and Domains

Now that you’ve developed the realms on your regional map, it’s time to name the realms and assign titles to their rulers! The Titles of Nobility table in ***ACKS II******Revised Rulebook***(p. XX) can be a useful tool for this purpose.

The method and nature by which you name your realms and titles will depend on the specifics of your campaign setting. You can give as much or as little thought to it as you want. Names don’t have any practical effect on gameplay but do shape your world’s “feel.” For instance, if you name a realm “The Republic of Pennsyltucky” and it’s led by “Lord Humungous III” your players will assume that your setting is either a post-apocalyptic United States or a gonzo world with silly names.

The Borderlands is part of my Auran Empire campaign setting and follows the naming conventions I used in developing the overall tone of the world. Generally, I draw on lesser-known historical names drawn from Antiquity and then to convert them into Classical Auran or one of the other languages in the setting. For instance, the country of Tirenea was named after the Italian region of Tyrrhenia, famous for piracy. It was also an allusion to the word “tyranny.” I converted it into the Classical Auran for “crown land.” I thought that appropriate because Tirenea is an ersatz Italy with a strong navy that dominates the region. The title of the leader of Tirenea is Tarkaun, which was a play on the Greek word *archon*, the Mongol word *khan*, and the Star Wars character Grand Moff Tarkin. In Classical Auran, it means “eagle” or, literally translated “big-bird.” Since the crown of Tirenea is gold, there is a deeply embedded Sesame Street joke at the heart of my setting. Make of this what you will.
