## Step 7: Update Settlement Encounter tables

The last step in creating your settlement is to update the settlement random encounter tables (p. XX) to reflect the particularities of your setting. For an example of how to do this in practice, compare the table in this book to the encounter table in our city sourcebook, ***AX3 Capital of the Borderlands.*** When you compare the ***JJ*** table to the ***AX3***table, you’ll note two major differences:

First, on the ***JJ***table, rolls of 89-100 trigger encounters. On the ***AX3***table, rolls of 89-100 direct you to re-roll on a sub-table which is specific to the district in which the encounter takes place. This trick allows us to avoid having to create entirely separate encounter tables for different boroughs or neighborhoods. One table covers “generic” encounters for the settlement as a whole, while the sub-tables offer unique encounters that occurred only in specific neighborhoods.

Second, on the ***JJ***table, each encounter entry is kept somewhat nonspecific. For instance, entry 01-04 states that “adventurers who bribe or drive off the City Watch receive 1d4 rumors and a pledge of aid from the beggars in the future.” On the ***AX3***table, each encounter is specific to the story web of Cyfaraun. Entry 01-04 states that “adventurers who bribe or drive off the City Watch will be invited to meet their friends at the Vagrant Colony (#73u).” The Vagrant Colony is a point of interest in Cyfaraun that is linked to a death cult in the city, whose existence is hinted at in ***AX3***encounters 49-52 and 105-108.

By undertaking a similar effort for your settlement, you can integrate the random encounters into the settlement story web, and reduce the need for improvisation during play, and generally increase verisimilitude. That said, this step is completely optional. You can easily run settlement adventures using the standard encounter table. Depending on the focus of your campaign, investing time here might not be worthwhile.
