## Step 6: Place Monsters

For each “monster” result obtained on the above table, you must choose or roll for a monster encounter appropriate for the dungeon level it appears on. Begin by rolling on **Dungeon Random Encounters by Level** table to determine which sub-table to consult, then consult the appropriate **Wandering Monsters by Level** table to determine the specific monster and the number appearing. You can use the tables we provided (p. XX) or the ones you created in Step 5, whichever you prefer.

EXAMPLE: The Judge obtained eight “monster” results on the Dungeon Stocking table. He decides to roll randomly to determine the specific monsters. Since this is a single level dungeon, he rolls eight times on the Dungeon Wandering Monster Level table for Dungeon Level 1. The dice indicate that seven of the monster encounters will be of Monster Level 1, and one will be of Monster Level 2. Rolling on the Monster Level 1 sub-table, his results are 8, 11, 3, 1, 1, 1, 1, resulting in 4 encounters with 2d4 goblins each; 1 encounter with 1d12 morlocks; 1 encounter with 3d6 giant rats; and 1 encounter with 1d10 stirges. Rolling once on the Monster Level 2 sub-table, his result is an 8, indicating an encounter with 1d6 pit vipers.

Next, assign each monster encounter to a room in the dungeon level. Monsters generated from a lower-level table might be placed near stairs or other inter-level passages connecting them to their natural level, or surrounding the lair of an intelligent monster from the current dungeon level which employs the lower-level monsters as guards. Intelligent monsters from higher-level tables might be placed in hidden or inaccessible areas, while unintelligent powerful monsters might have a whole dungeon area to themselves, shunned by other creatures.

When placing monsters, you should consult the monster entries in the ***ACKS II******Monstrous Manual*** to determine if the monsters are in a lair. Monsters with lairs will have treasure, as detailed below in **Assigning Treasure**. For most creatures, such as giant rats or centipedes, you can simply check against the monster’s Lair characteristic to see whether the monsters have a lair in the dungeon or are just temporarily holing up. If monsters are in their lair, you can add additional encounters with the same type of monster nearby in order to scale up the number of creatures to the full lair amount, if desired.

EXAMPLE: The Judge consults the monster entries to find the Lair for giant rats (10%), striges (40%) and pit vipers (none). He rolls for Lair for the rats and stirges, and determines that the stirges are in a lair. A lair of striges can be as many as 3d12, but he decides to stick with one encounter of 1d10 striges so as not to overwhelm the dungeon with stirges.

Some types of monsters have lairs composed of a variable number of encounter groups. For example, goblins are encountered in gangs (encounter groups) of 2d4, and a goblin lair is composed of 3d6 gangs. If the stocking procedure has generated multiple encounters with a particular type of organized monster, then the dungeon should be assumed to hold a lair of that type of monster. One room in the dungeon should be chosen as the lair, and one of the monster encounters assigned to it. The other encounters rolled for that monster type should be placed nearby to form watch points, barracks, or splinter colonies. The various rooms should then be reinforced with any leaders, champions, or other creatures indicated by the monster entry. If space permits, you can also add additional groups in other nearby rooms, up to the maximum number of groups that can be encountered for a lair.

EXAMPLE: Because the Judge rolled four encounters with goblin gangs, the dungeon holds a goblin lair. The Judge chooses a remote room in the rear of the dungeon as the lair, and places one goblin gang there. Nearby he places several guard posts with the other three gangs. He adds a champion to each gang, as instructed by the monster entry. The entry also states that a lair will have a chieftain, sub-chieftain, females, and young, so he adds those creatures to the lair room.

Sometimes the stocking procedure results in only one encounter with a monster that normally lairs in organized groups. Such isolated parties will not normally have lair treasure, unless the monster entry indicates that the number of groups appearing in the lair can equal one; in this case, the lone group may be the survivors of a larger tribe, or a splinter faction absconding with a portion of their former brethren’s treasure. Otherwise, you have two options. You can roll additional groups to form a lair of the size indicated by the monster entry, or you can decide that the group on this level is simply an isolated party temporarily holing-up in the dungeon.

EXAMPLE: The Judge rolled one encounter with a gang of morlocks. Morlock lairs consist of 1d8 gangs. The Judge therefore has three options. He can choose to have these morlocks constitute a small lair of one gang; he can choose to add additional gangs; or he can decide that the morlocks are an isolated group and not part of a lair. He opts for the latter.
