## Monster Creation Steps

1. Begin with a **concept** for the monster. A concept can be as general or specific as you wish. Useful sources of concepts include myth and legend; ancient and medieval bestiaries; fantasy and science fiction; comic books; and other games.
2. Choose your monster’s **type**. The monster types are animal, beastmen, construct, enchanted creature, giant, incarnation, humanoid, ooze, plant, undead, and vermin (see *ACKS*,p. 151). A monster can belong to multiple types. Monster type established the number and type of special abilities the creature may have. It determines the effectiveness of various *bewitch*, *discern, halt,* *holy circle*, and *slumber* spells against the creature. Monster type also interacts with the creature’s HD to determine its **saving throws**. See the **Monster Type** table, below.
3. Choose your monster’s **hit dice**. The weakest creatures have less than 1 HD, while the most powerful have 36 HD or more. HD is an abstract measure of a creature’s fighting ability and toughness, roughly paralleling a character’s class level. A monster’s HD will influence the monster’s **mass** and **normal load**, and determine its **armor class** and **damage**. HD also determines the monster’s base **XP value**, which in turn influences its **treasure type**.
4. Determine the monster’s **saving throws** by cross-referencing its Hit Dice with its type on the Monster Type table and rolling or choosing an appropriate value.
5. Select an appropriate **body form** for the monster based on your concept and its type. For instance, a monster might have a *canine* body form (like a dire wolf or hellhound), a *formic* body form (like a giant ant), or a *serpentine* body form (like a giant python or sea serpent). The choice of body form will interact with the monster’s HD to determine its mass and normal load, and determines its natural attacks. See the **Monster Body Form** table, below, for further details.
6. Determine the monster’s **weight** in pounds. The formula for weight is (HD x 10)BME. **BME** is the monster’s **body mass exponent**, a value that varies between 0 and 3 depending on the monster’s body form. BME values are found on the Monster Body Form table. The lower a creature’s BME, the more ferocious and dangerous it is for its size. Thus a tiger (BME 1.52) is far more dangerous pound-for-pound than a light horse (BME 2.31).
7. Determine the monster’s **size category** by finding its weight on the **Monster Size Category** table, below. Size category modifies AC, and also has an impact on many ancillary characteristics.
8. Determine the monster’s **normal load** in stone. The formula for normal load is (weight x carrying capacity factor). **Carrying capacity factor (CCF)** is a value which ranges from 0.01 to 1.0, depending on the monster’s body form. Carrying capacity factors are found on the Monster Body Form table.
9. Determine the monster’s **armor class**. The formula for monster AC is 0.8 x HD for up to 9 HD. HD after 9 do not increase AC. Round to the nearest whole number, rounding 0.5 up if odd and down if even. Body form may provide a bonus or penalty to AC, as shown on the Monster Body Form table. Size category may provide a bonus or penalty to AC, as shown on the Monster Size Category table. Draconine body form follows slightly different rules (see footnote on p. XX).
10. Choose the monster’s **natural attacks**. The recommended natural attacks for each body form are listed on the Monster Body Form table. You can add, remove, or modify these natural attacks as appropriate for the type of monster you are creating. Monster attack throws are determined based on Hit Dice (as per *ACKS*,p. 102).
11. Determine the monster’s **damage** from its attacks. The monster’s attacks should inflict an average of 2 hp of damage per HD the monster possesses. This damage may be divided among all their attacks as desired. For instance, a monster with 5 HD should inflict an average of (5 x 2) hp of damage per round. If the monster has two attacks, it might deal 2d4 damage with each. The **Monster Natural Attack** table offers recommended monster damage by natural attack at various HD ranges.
12. Decide the monster’s **speed**.The recommended speeds for each body form are listed on the **Monster Body Form** table.
13. Assign **special senses** and **special abilities** to the monster. A monster can have from zero to five special abilities. (You can create monsters with more than five special abilities if you want, but they’ll be very powerful.) You can choose the number based on your concept, or may randomly determine the number by rolling the dice listed for its type on the **Monster Type** table. For each special ability, you should roll or choose one selection from the **Monster Special Abilities** table. Note which, if any, special abilities count towards the monster’s XP value, and record these as asterisks next to its HD. Note that some special abilities may change the monster’s natural attacks, damage, armor class, or speed. Update those characteristics where appropriate.
14. Decide the monster’s **morale** score, from -4 to +4. Mindless monsters have no morale score and never check morale.
15. Calculate the monster’s **XP value**. To calculate a monster’s XP, begin with the base XP value for its Hit Dice on the **Monster Experience Table**. Add the value for the XP bonus per \*, multiplied by the number of special abilities the monster has.
16. Choose the monster’s **typical dungeon encounter** and **typical wilderness encounter.** Each typical encounter entry should be listed as: [Collective Noun] (Number Encountered) / [Collective Noun] (Number Encountered). The first collective noun (e.g., “gang”) and subsequent number encountered (“2d4”) describes encounters outside of the creature’s lair. The second collective noun (“lair”) and subsequent number encountered (“1 warband”) describes encounters inside the creature’s lair. The number encountered in the lair is usually a distinct number of monsters (such as “2d6”), but sometimes is based on the ranges encountered outside the lair (e.g., “1 warband”). The latter is common for monsters that have a clan or tribal structure. If the monster does not make a lair, then list only one collective noun and range. If the monster is not found in one of the two settings (dungeon or wilderness), list “none.” The **Monster Organization** table offers recommendations for typical encounters.
17. Determine the monster’s **degree of intelligence**. Monsters can possess sapient intelligence; animal intelligence; or mindless. The **Monster Intelligence by Type** table shows the options available for each type of monster and the **Animal Intelligence by Body Form** shows trainability modifier and base training time.
18. Choose the monster’s **alignment** from the available options on the **Monster Alignment** table.
19. Determine the nature and value of the **monster’s spoils,** including special components as well as mundane antlers, claws, horns, feathers, pelts, etc.
20. Calculate the monster’s taming and training characteristics including calculating its **lifespan**, **battle rating**, **trained value**, and **untrained values**.
21. Determine the monster’s **treasure type**. First, determine the monster’s **average treasure value** by multiplying the XP value of one monster by 4 times the average number of monsters encountered in its lair. Then decide whether the monster accumulates treasure by hoarding, by raiding, or by accident. Consult the **Monster Treasure Type** table, cross-referencing its average treasure value with its method of treasure accumulation to find its treasure type.
22. Review your monster and make any adjustments desired. If you’re happy, tabulate your design in a monster listing and write up a short summary of its appearance, behavior, and habitat. Your monster is complete!
