## Sample Monster Creation

The following example walks through the creation of a monster from scratch, following each step in order:

1. Perusing the *ACKS* rulebook, the Judge has noticed that many of the monsters, such as the griffon and wyvern, were commonly used in medieval heraldry. But one of his favorite heraldic creatures, the double-headed imperial eagle of the Byzantine Empire and Holy Roman Empire, is missing! The Judge decides to create a double-headed eagle, sacred bird of a powerful empire in his campaign.
2. The double-headed eagle, being an animal with an impossible combination of body parts, is clearly a monstrosity.
3. The griffon and wyvern are both 7 HD creatures. Since the double-headed eagle is rarer than those monsters, and used as a symbol of empire, he makes it a slightly more powerful 8 HD monster.
4. As an 8 HD monstrosity, the double-headed eagle saves as a Fighter of level (HD/4 x 1d8). The Judge rolls a 4, so the double-headed eagle will save as an 8th level Fighter.
5. Because his monster is modeled after an eagle, the Judge chooses the aquiline body form.
6. As an aquiline, the double-headed eagle can have a body mass exponent (BME) of 1.63 to 1.67. The Judge wants his eagle to look powerful but not oversized, so he selects a mid-range value of 1.65. The double-headed eagle’s weight, according to the formula (HD x 10)BME, is 1,380 lbs.
7. With a weight of 1,380 lbs, the double-headed eagle falls within the Large size category. The Judge decides it will be 10’ long with a 40’ wingspan. It has a -1 penalty to AC because of its size.
8. Now it’s time to calculate the double-headed eagle’s normal load. The formula for normal load is (weight x carrying capacity factor). As an aquiline, the double-headed eagle can have a carrying capacity factor (CCF) of 0.050. The double-headed eagle has a normal load of (1,380 x 0.050) 69 stone. This seems reasonable, as it is between the normal load of a 6 HD roc (40 stone) and a 12 HD roc (150 stone).
9. Next the Judge calculates the double-headed eagle’s AC. The formula for monster AC is (0.8 x HD), rounding to the nearest whole number. Therefore the double-headed eagle has an AC of (8 x 0.8) 6.4, rounded to 6. As an aquiline, it gains a +1 bonus to AC. As a large monster, it suffers a -1 penalty to AC. Its final AC is (6 +1 – 1) 6.
10. An aquiline’s natural attacks are 2 talons and 1 bite. The Judge knows he wants the double-headed eagle to be able to bite with both its heads, but the second bite will be added later, during special abilities.
11. The average damage dealt by each of the double-headed eagle’s attack sequences should be around (8 x 2) 16 points. Looking at the monster attack table, he notes that an 8 HD talon attack has a recommended damage of 2d8 points. If the eagle’s attack sequence included those two talons, its average damage would be (9 + 9) 18 points per round – already over the recommended 16 points, and leaving nothing for the bite attack. Since his concept called for the eagle to have a bite attack, the Judge opts for 2 talons dealing 2d4 points of damage each and 1 bite dealing 2d6 points of damage.
12. As an aquiline, the double-headed eagle can have a flying speed of 450’ to 480’. The Judge chooses the slower speed, 450’, since he envisions the eagle as big and burly rather than sleek and fast.
13. It’s time to assign special abilities to the double-headed eagle. Since the double-headed eagle is a monstrosity, the Judge rolls 2d6-7 for its special abilities. The result is a 10, so the monster has 3 special abilities. The Judge has already picked two special abilities he wants the double-headed eagle to have, so there’s no need to make a random roll for them. The first ability he chooses is bonus attack, giving the eagle an additional bite dealing 2d6 points of damage. The second ability he chooses is flying. Since the double-headed eagle can already fly, it becomes capable of dive attacks instead. The Judge decides to roll for the third special ability. The d100 roll yields a 15, Dreadful. Dreadful is a major ability (\*) while bonus attack and flying are both minor abilities (## and ####, respectively). Adding the number of # from all minor abilities divided by 8 yields 0.75; adding 0.75 to the number of \* from major abilities results in a total of 1.75, which rounds to 2. Therefore the Judge notes that the double-headed eagle is an 8\*\* HD creature.
14. The Judge has to choose the double-headed eagle’s morale score. Since the eagle is famous for its regal pride and nobility, he decides the double-headed eagle has a morale score of +2.
15. Now the Judge calculates the double-headed eagle’s XP value. On the Monster Experience table, the base XP value for its Hit Dice is 600, while the value per XP bonus is 500. The double-headed eagle is therefore worth [600 + (2 x 500)] 1,600 XP. It will have special components worth 1,600gp, as well.
16. After reviewing the Monster Organization table for aquiline body forms, the Judge decides that the double-headed eagle is only encountered in the wilderness. Its organization is flight (1d8) when encountered away from its lair, and aerie (1d10) in its wilderness lair.
17. As a monstrosity, the double-headed eagle can possess either animal or sapient intelligence. Since he’s already determined that the double-headed eagle collects treasure, the Judge decides it’s of sapient intelligence.
18. A sapient monstrosity can be of any alignment. Since the double-headed eagle is the sacred bird of a powerful empire in his campaign, the Judge decides it should be of Lawful alignment. Lawful creatures represent the forces of civilization and order.
19. Since it is worth 1,600 XP, the double-headed eagle has special components with a 1,600gp value. The Judge also decides it has 6d10 flight feathers that each fetch 7d6gp and weigh 1/4 st. The average value of its spoils is (1,600gp) + (6 x 5.5 x 7 x 3.5gp) = 2,408gp.
20. The Judge decides to calculate the double-headed eagle’s taming and training characteristics. These include its lifespan, trained value, untrained adult value, child value, and baby value.
    1. The Judge decides to calculate the double-headed eagle’s lifespan using the real-world golden eagle as a baseline. A golden eagle has a maximum lifespan of 30 years and a weight of 11 lbs. The double-headed eagle therefore has a maximum lifespan of 30 years x (1,380 lbs/11 lbs)0.25 = 100 years. This gives it lifespan age categories of 0/1/5/10/40/60/80/100.
    2. The double-headed eagle’s trained value is equal to (AC/2+1) x (HD) x (average damage) x (1 + # of Special Abilities) x 24. Its trained value is (7/2+1) x (8) x (16) x (1 + 2) x 24 = 41,472. This is increased by eightfold because of its flight speed and carrying capacity, to 331,776gp, rounding to 332,000gp. In comparison, a large roc is worth 400,000gp.
    3. The double-headed eagle’s battle rating is equal to (332,000gp / 2 ) / 24,000 = 6.91. That is about 1 point higher than the BR of a large roc (6.108).
    4. The double-headed eagle’s untrained adult value is the greater of its normal load x 8gp or its spoils of 2,408gp. Therefore its untrained adult value is 2,408gp. This is again comparable to, but less valuable than, the large roc (2,900gp).
    5. The Judge calculates the double-headed eagle’s juvenile value as 4% of its trained value, or 13,280gp. He calculates the double-headed eagle’s baby value as 2% of its trained value, or 6,640gp.
21. The Judge decides that, like dragons, double-headed eagles collect treasure. That makes it a hoarder. There will be an average of 5.5 double-headed eagles in a lair, so their average treasure value is (1,600 XP) x (4 x 5.5) 35,200. Cross-referencing the average treasure value (35,200) with the hoarder type on the Monster Treasure table, the Judge sees that the double-headed eagle has treasure type Q, N, H, D.
22. At this point, all of the calculations to create the double-headed eagle are finished! The Judge reviews its characteristics and turns to crafting a write-up of the monster.
