### Beastman

Beastmen are the crossbred creations of ancient Zahar, created by ancient magic and enslaved in service to their dark masters. The Zaharans created many breeds of beastmen, sometimes crossing different strains repeatedly in their quest for the perfect living weapon. Six major breeds of beastmen have been identified by the sages of Aura: kobolds, goblins, orcs, hobgoblins, gnolls, and bugbears. The Zaharans also bred ogres and trolls, though the sages of Aura consider them separate species (q.v.).

Apart from kobolds, who were bred as pets, the other breeds of beastmen were created to be soldiers for the Zaharan army – ruthless and blood-thirsty, but susceptible to control by a powerful leader. In the absence of an external authority (such as a Zaharan sorcerer-king), beastmen organize themselves into bands of loosely-related gangs ruled by a chieftain. Endemic warfare between nearby bands is constant, until eventually one of the chieftains succeeds in unifying the bands into a clan under his rule. Born of evil magic, there is nothing redeemable about beastmen, and every Auran missionary who has ever attempted to find good in them has ended up dying painfully and being eaten.

Isolated bands usually have no permanent home, living a nomadic existence that follows seasonably available wild plants and game. Nomadic beastmen dwell in tents made from animal hides sewn together or woven hair wrapped around wooden poles. These tents are usually small, but can be as large as thirty feet in diameter. Less fortunate nomads may just take shelter where they can find it. Nomadic beastmen survive by hunting wildlife, gathering wild forage, and raiding civilized settlements. Roving bands are often composed of only males, their females having been lost to stronger rivals.

Established beastman clans tend to permanently or semi-permanently dwell in ruins, caves, captured strongholds, or villages. Beastmen in villages generally live in roundhouses constructed of whatever materials are at hand. In wet, wooded climates, roundhouses with timber or wattle-and-daub walls and thatched roofs will dominate. In other terrain, the walls are constructed of mudbrick or stone, mortared with sand, soil, and dung, while the roof covering is of woven hair or animal-hide, sewn to short spars. Stone-lined pits are dug for iron forges, kilns, food storage, and waste.

Sometimes the buildings are gathered to form a ring fort or hill-fort, surrounded by ditches, moats, earthen ramparts or piled stone walls. The skulls of dead foes frequently adorn these defenses.

When settled, beastmen clans practice horticulture, cultivating small plots of mixed crops using hand tools. Beastmen care nothing for crop rotation or soil sustainability, and will simply burn or cut away a clearing, then farm it until the soil is exhausted. It is not uncommon to find large tracts of exhausted scrub around beastmen settlements. In arid terrain, they may herd goats, sheep, cows, pigs, and other livestock that can graze on the scant vegetation. Beastmen tribes that have captured many prisoners in raids may have slave laborers working farms, but these are usually short-lived; beastmen do not breed or care for their slaves, and simply eat those that die.

Family relations are brutal; beastmen males are considerably larger than the females, whom they dominate. Both sexes lack any capacity whatsoever for compassion, empathy, kindness, or love. High-status males maintain large harems, within which the females compete for provision and protection. Low-status males have no chance to mate at all, except by gaining status through violence or subterfuge. As a result, beastmen males typically spend much of their time fighting, hunting, and raiding. More than half die from wounds sustained in such activities before middle age.

Beastmen care little for their prepubescent children, feeding them scraps and often exiling them to the edges of the camp fires. Many whelps die of exposure or under-nourishment, leaving just the toughest and most cunning to survive to adulthood, usually by murdering their siblings.

Beastmen who lack the size and temperament to serve as warriors are known as drudges, and are forced to handle all of the chores the warriors refuse to do, such as farming, foraging, cooking, and camping. Most of these drudges are females, but some are males who through disability, injury, or other reasons are unable to serve as warriors.

The drudges also craft blankets, clothing, furniture, tools, and shelter from the woven hair of sheep and goats, or the leather, bone, sinew, and hide of animals. Indeed, of the crafts, only metal-working is the province of warriors, and it is typically limited to working wrought iron in pit-furnaces. Knowledge of weapon- and armor-smithing is rare, with only a handful of smiths in a tribe. Knowledge is handed down orally within families, and blood feuds lasting generations can simmer between rival families.

Beastmen speak a number of distinct languages, each of which is a barely-recognizable dialect of Ancient Zaharan. A beastman warrior has a 10% chance of speaking Common. A beastman champion, chief, shaman, sub-chieftain, or witch doctor has a 10% chance per HD of speaking Common.
