## About the Game

The ***Adventurer Conqueror King System*** (***ACKS***)is a set of rules for role-playing in a world of swords, sorcery, and strongholds, where you take on the role of an adventurer in an imaginary land drawn from the epics and legends of the past. The core rules for ***ACKS***were first published in 2012. This book, the ***Adventurer Conqueror King System Imperial Imprint***(***ACKS II***)***Revised Rulebook***, is a revised and expanded edition of the original core rules. The ***ACKS II Revised Rulebook***provides a complete toolkit for enjoying a wide variety of heroic fantasy settings. It covers character creation, proficiencies, spells, adventures, encounters, and combat, and all the associated game mechanics necessary for swords-and-sorcery adventure.

For those who prefer a pre-generated world for their gaming, the ***ACKS II Revised Rulebook***also provides the default setting of the **Auran Empire**, an ancient and opulent land drowning in a torrent of violence from all sides. Primeval wars and wild magic have left behind terrible monsters that, in this declining age, can no longer easily be held in check. Confronted by the imminent collapse of the once-great empire, you may be a scavenger and vagabond feasting off its corpse, a hero fighting to save what you can, or a would-be conqueror intent on forging a new kingdom from the ashes of the old.

Whatever setting your adventures inhabit, with ***ACKS II***you can seek fame, wealth, and power by conquering foes, gathering treasure, and accumulating land and followers. If you are skilled and lucky, you may rise to become a mighty overlord, wizard-king, or theocrat, holding the destiny of thousands in your hands. If not, the wages of your adventures will be merely death…
