## Activities

Throughout the course of playing ***ACKS****,* characters will have the opportunity to undertake many activities, ranging from going on adventures to constructing buildings to running domains to performing magical research.

Activities are divided into **dedicated activities**, **ancillary activities**, and **incidental activities**. Dedicated activities are laborious tasks requiring eight hours to perform. A character who undertakes a dedicated activity is sometimes said to “dedicate the day to that activity.” For instance, “Balbus dedicated the day to magic research” or “the party dedicated the day to travel.”

Ancillary activities are errands or pastimes requiring about one hour (6 turns) to perform. Incidental activities require virtually no time at all. Each game day, an adventurer can undertake one dedicated activity and four ancillary activities or perform up to 12 ancillary activities. A character can perform any reasonable number of incidental activities.

Most campaign activities are **singular** **activities** that take place within a single game day, and can be repeated as often as desired within the limits of available activity.A **restricted activity** takes place within a single day, but cannot be repeated until a certain time period elapses. An **ongoing activity** requires more than one game day to complete, such that the character will have to perform the activity throughout the given time period. Both dedicated and ancillary activities can be ongoing. A **dedicated ongoing activity** represents a period of full-time labor in order to complete a complex project or task. Magical research, for instance, is a dedicated ongoing activity typically requiring days, weeks, or even months. An **ancillary ongoing activity** represents an intermittent effort occurring in short bursts that must be sustained over a lengthy period of time. Managing a subordinate, for instance, typically requires a short period of time every day for as long as the subordinate is employed.

Most campaign activities are **unstrenuous**, but some are **strenuous.** For every six game days of strenuous activity, a character must dedicate one day to **rest**. Characters who do not get the appropriate rest after six game days of strenuous activity become **fatigued** until they have caught up on required rest. (This is why wilderness travel requires rest and recuperation!) Unstrenuous activities do not require rest.

Sometimes adventurers might wish to completely dedicate to an activity, that is, to use both their dedicated activity and some of their ancillary activities that day on the task. This is known as **working overtime** (for most activities) or **force marching** (for travel). A character who is force marching completely dedicates his day to travel and cannot take any ancillary activities, but he increases time spent and distance traveled by up to 50%. Working overtime on an unstrenuous activity makes the activity count as a strenuous activity. Force marching or working overtime on a strenuous activity counts as six days of strenuous activity, immediately requiring rest.

In desperate circumstances, characters might want to work all day and through the night. Each additional four ancillary activities (four hours) after working overtime or force marching increases the fatigue penalty by 1 point (rounded up).

Most campaign activities are open to any character. Others can only be undertaken if the character meets particular requirements of class, level, location, proficiency, or equipment. The requirements are noted in the activity’s description.

The activities rules are implicitly present in all aspects of play. For instance, delving a dungeon requires an ancillary activity for every 6 turns of exploration. Traveling at expedition speed requires making travel the party’s dedicated activity. Foraging for food is an ancillary activity, so it can be done on the same day dedicated to wilderness travel, but hunting is a dedicated activity so it cannot. A more expansive list of activities is provided in Chapter 8, **Campaigns**.
