# Chapter 2: Classes

In the ***Adventurer Conqueror King System****,* there are two major types of classes: human classes and racial or demi-human classes.

Humans are the most widespread of all races. Their ambition, cunning, and courage have led them to settle most of the known world, so most characters in the game will belong to one of the human classes. The core human classes described in these rules are the **fighter**, **explorer**, **thief**, **mage**, **crusader**,and **venturer**. Each of the core classes specializes in a particular aspect of gameplay — combat, wilderness exploration, dungeon delving, arcane casting, divine casting, and mercantile ventures. The core classes are presented in order of complexity, in order to aid you in learning the game. It is much easier for a new player to be a fighter than a venturer, for instance. After the core classes, nine additional human classes, the **assassin**, **barbarian**, **bard**, **bladedancer**, **paladin, priestess**, **shaman, warlock,** and **witch** are provided to show how the core classes can be customized for specific cultures or niches within a campaign setting. Many other human classes can be found in ***ACKS***supplements such as ***Axioms***,***Barbarian Conquerors of Kanahu***, ***Heroic Fantasy Handbook***, and the***Player’s Companion***.

Compared to humans, demi-humans are rare, and generally more specialized. Demi-human classes are defined by their race, with different classes available for dwarves, elves, and other demi-humans. The six demi-human classes described in these rules are the **dwarven craftpriest**, **dwarven vaultguard**, **elven nightblade, elven spellsword**, **Nobiran wonderworker**, and **Zaharan ruinguard**. Additional demi-human classes can be found in ***ACKS***supplements such as ***Aryxymaraki’s Almanac of Unusual Magic***, ***Axioms***, ***Barbarian Conquerors of Kanahu***, ***By This Axe***, ***Heroic Fantasy Handbook***, ***Player’s Companion***, and ***Secrets of the Nethercity****.*

Each class in this book is presented with eight pre-generated **templates**, with weapons, armor, equipment, proficiencies, and spells ready for play. You determine your character’s template randomly with a roll of 3d6. If you don’t like the template you rolled, you can choose a template from a lower roll, but not from a higher roll.

Selecting equipment and proficiencies can be time-consuming, especially for new players. Even experienced players might want a faster alternative, particularly in campaigns that tend to be highly lethal for low level characters. However, if the players and Judge are all familiar with ***ACKS***or have time to invest*,* the Judge can opt to have the players roll 3d6 x 10 for starting gold and then assign them or have them pick proficiencies, spells, and equipment as desired.

For a campaign with a highly specific setting, the Judge might offer a default to a different template that is more appropriate to his campaign. For example, a maritime or “saltbox” campaign might allow fighters to default to the corsair template, thieves to the buccaneer template, and explorers to the mariner template. A campaign filled with Renaissance era intrigue might allow bards to default to the spy template, bladedancers to the veiled assassin template, and mages to the noble magist template. The ultimate decision of whether templates are used during character creation, and if so under what conditions, is always in the Judge’s hands.
