## The Basics of The Game

Read this section carefully! These terms will be used throughout the rules of the ***Adventurer Conqueror King System***.

When a group of people sit down to play ***ACKS****,* the participants are called **players**, and they each take on the role of a **character** (or, sometimes, more than one character). Characters played by players are referred to as **player characters** or **adventurers**. The players act in the role of their characters in the world designed and presented by a special game participant referred to as the **Game** **Judge** (or **Judge** for short)**.** It’s the Judge’s responsibility to prepare ahead of time to give the players opportunities for adventure, and to judge the results of their choices during adventures fairly and wisely. The Judge is the referee of the game, and the final arbitrator of rules and rules decisions. He also narrates the action of the game, and plays the roles of all the various **monsters** in the world. A special type of monster is the **non-player character (NPC)**. NPCs share many similarities with the characters played by the players, but the Judge determines their actions, personalities, and motivations. PCs, NPCs, and other monsters are collectively called **creatures.**

Characters have **attributes**,which determine how strong, smart, and otherwise talented they are. Based on their attributes, characters each will select a **class**, such as fighter or mage, which might be thought of as a profession, and which dictates what sorts of training and capabilities characters can develop, including their unique **class powers** and trained **proficiencies**. Characters have levels of experience, or **class levels**, which measure how well-developed and powerful they are. Player characters begin at 1st level in a particular class. Normal people, lacking the call to adventure, are generally 0th level characters. Spellcasters have **caster levels** that determine how effective their magic is. Caster level is usually, but not always, equal to class level.

**Experience points (XP)** are used to measure the advancement of characters through their class levels. These points are earned based partly on how powerful defeated monsters are, but mostly on how much treasure is found and returned to civilization by the player characters. As characters accumulate experience points through fighting monsters and gaining wealth, they will reach higher levels (2nd level, 3rd level, and so on). Gaining a level incrementally marks your character’s advancement. As a character gains levels, he becomes ever more powerful.

Monsters also have levels, called **monster levels**,whichare a direct measure of how challenging an opponent the monster is. Likewise, **spell levels** measure how powerful a spell is. Monster and spell levels do not directly correspond to class levels; they are only a relative measure of power.

When a character advances in level, he gains additional **hit points** **(hp),** which allow him to endure more damage and survive. Characters most often take damage from monsters while engaged in an **encounter**. An encounter is a situation in which the PCs and monsters are interacting. Time and movement are measured in detail during encounters, with actions resolved in a precise order known as **initiative**.

A series of encounters connected by time, location, and player choices is called an **adventure**. An adventure is often used to describe one play session, but it might also indicate a complete **scenario** that is played out over several sessions. A series of adventures in the same game world is referred to as a **campaign**.

Early in their career, adventurers will delve into **dungeons**,underground complexes that are stocked with many monsters, treasures, and treacherous secrets. Dungeons can be as small as a monster den or as large as an underground city. While the Judge may design these areas, published pre-made dungeons might also be used. Dungeons are divided into **dungeon levels**. A dungeon level could be thought of as a floor of a building. When characters travel into the top-most level of a dungeon, they are in the level closest to the surface of the earth. If the dungeon has multiple levels, the next level down is the second level, then the third, and so on. The deeper the dungeon level, the greater the dangers that await the characters.

If an adventurer is not slain or otherwise removed from play, he will eventually reach a high level. At this time, adventurers often begin to buy, construct, or conquer **strongholds**, such as castles or towers. Strongholds enable a character to attract **followers** and open up new campaign activities and new avenues of gameplay. Some types of strongholds enable adventurers to establish criminal syndicates, monster-filled dungeons, or hidden fastnesses. Other types enable adventurers to establish **domains** over which they exert sovereign control. With careful play, an adventurer may establish or conquer multiple domains and ultimately establish himself as ruler of a **realm**.Becoming the ruler of a vast realm is the ultimate goal of many adventurers in ***Adventurer Conqueror King*** campaigns.
