## Rolling and Throwing the Dice

The ***Adventurer Conqueror King System***has a variety of different systems and sub-systems that determine how situations are resolved. All of these various sub-systems rely on generating a randomized outcome by using dice.

###### Rolling the Dice

During the course of play, many situations will arise in which there are a range of possible outcomes. The players or Judge will make a **roll of the dice** to see which of the possible outcomes occurs. Thus, when a character meets a monster during an encounter, the Judge will make a **surprise roll** to see if either or both sides are caught off guard and a **reaction roll** to see how the monster reacts to the character, with results ranging from friendly to hostile.

Likewise, when a character is in combat, the player will make an **initiative roll** to determine when he gets to act, with results ranging from last to first. When a character hits an opponent, the player will make a **damage roll** to determine how many hit points his target loses. When monsters begin to lose a battle, they will make a **morale roll** to determine if they flee, surrender, or stay and fight.

To make a roll of the dice, you follow these steps:

* Roll the appropriate die for the given situation.
* Add any relevant modifiers to the number generated by the die.
* Apply the total as required by the given situation.

Sometimes a roll may automatically succeed or fail if the minimum or maximum value is rolled on the die. Sometimes a roll will be applied for an absolute result. For example, a damage roll is applied directly against the hit points of the target hit. Other rolls are relative to each other. For example, a character’s initiative roll is compared against the initiative rolls of other characters to determine who goes first during combat. An initiative roll of 6 has no absolute meaning other than being faster than an initiative roll of 5. Other rolls are compared to a table.

###### Throwing the Dice

One very common type of die roll is called a **throw.** A throw occurs whenever a character or monster is taking an action that will **succeed or fail**.For instance, when a character attempts to strike an opponent in combat, his player makes an **attack throw.** When a character tries to avoid a catastrophic event, his player makes a **saving throw.** When a character attempts to open a lock or bash down a door, his player makes a **proficiency throw.** Most throws are resolved with 1d20.

To make a throw of the dice, you follow these steps:

* Throw the appropriate die for the action chosen.
* Add any relevant modifiers to the number generated by the die.
* Compare the total to a **target value** for the action, usually expressed as #+ (such as 11+).

If the total equals or exceeds the target value, the outcome is favorable to the character. If the result is lower than the target value, the outcome is unfavorable to the character. The value required to succeed at different throws is usually based on the character’s class and level. For instance, fighters have easier attack throws than other characters, while thieves have easier proficiency throws to sneak around.

EXAMPLE: Marcus has an attack throw value of 6+. When he makes an attack throw, he will roll 1d20, add any relevant modifiers to the die, and compare the total to his attack throw value. If it equals or exceeds 6, he will hit.

If a particular throw is subject to a modifier that will always apply, it is often easier to record this modifier as an adjustment to the target value for the throw. Bonuses reduce the target value required, while penalties increase the target value required.

EXAMPLE: Viktir has a Lockpicking proficiency throw of 16+. However, he has a Lockpicking Expertise proficiency that gives him a +2 bonus to picking locks. For ease of play, Viktir can record his Lockpicking proficiency throw as 14+, applying the +2 bonus as a 2-point reduction in the target value instead of modifying the die roll. Throwing the die and aiming for 14+ is mathematically identical to throwing the die with a +2 bonus and aiming for 16+.

**Automatic Success and Failure:** Unless otherwise noted, a roll of 1 on a throw automatically fails. (Some throws may have a wider range of automatic failure.) A roll of 20 on a throw automatically succeeds if the character making the throw is proficient in the task at hand. Non-proficient characters who just “roll the die and pray” do not automatically succeed on a 20.

**Botches and Crits:** Some throws may allow for special effects to occur if particular results are rolled on the die. For instance, a thief who rolls a 1 when attempting a proficiency throw to disarm a trap not only automatically fails, he triggers the trap as well. These rules are provided on a case-by-case basis for each throw. A low roll that triggers a special effect is called a **botch** and a high roll that triggers a special effect is called a **crit**.

###### What Kind of Die Should You Use?

The kind of die used for the various rolls depends on the riskiness and randomness of the situation a character is facing. The rules will detail which die is used in each situation; below is a general explanation that will help frame the rules to come.

In general, situations where the outcome is strongly influenced by both skill and fortune are resolved by using a twenty-sided die (1d20). Most throws use 1d20, with the usual target value for the throw being in the range of 10 to 20. When throwing 1d20, a modifier such as +2 or -3 has a significant but not overpowering impact on the outcome.

Sometimes, the outcome of a situation will be heavily influenced by factors of skill or innate ability, with less scope for random chance. These situations are usually resolved by throwing or rolling a six-sided die (1d6). Surprise rolls, initiative rolls and many damage rolls use d6s. With a range of numbers of just 1 – 6, a modifier such as +2 or -3 makes a very big difference.

Where a wide range of outcomes is possible, but some are much more probable than others, a roll of two six-sided dice (2d6) is used. A roll of 2d6 will generate a bell curve with common results centered on 6 – 8, and rare outcomes at 2 – 3 and 11 – 12. Reaction rolls and morale rolls both use 2d6. Monsters will generally react cautiously to adventurers, and generally stay and fight with moderate resolve, but might occasionally be very friendly or very hostile, fight to the death or flee in terror.
