## Lands

According to the cartographers of Aura, Cybele has four continents: Aurëpos, Ithea, Ulruk, and Danea. The continent of Aurëpos (“Continent by the Sea” in the Classical tongue), so named because it encircles the great inland sea called the Ammas Aurë (“Sea of Serenity”), lies at the epicenter of the other continents, and enjoys the mildest climate and most fertile soil in the known world. Ulruk lies to the south of Aurëpos, Danea to the north, and Ithea to the west.

The dominant power on Aurëpos is the Auran Empire. Over 21,000,000 souls live within the Empire’s borders, and over 500,000 residents dwell in its majestic capital, Aura (“Dawn”). Founded over 1,300 years ago, the city of Aura encompasses the entirety of a large island just off the northern tip of Tirenea. The city encircles Mt. Audarammas (“Serene Light of the Morning”), the sacred mountain, site of the Golden Temple of the Winged Sun, and extends onto the mainland by means of a great causeway. Mainland Tirenea (“Land of Crowns”) itself is the richest, most populated province of the Auran Empire. Tirenea is a hilly, fertile land with many harbors and cities, the Jewel of the World.

Visible from the shores of Tirenea is Corcano (“Tree Fields”), a black island of palms and olive trees with active volcanoes and rocky slopes. The Corcanoans are predominantly fishermen and merchants, plying the trade routes to and from Aura, though the island itself is most famous for the colossal automaton that stands guard over its shores.

West of Tirenea lies Nicea (“Hill Land”), a rocky province of the Empire with cities nestled at the foothills of the rugged Achaean Mountains. These peaks grow ever fiercer as they run southward, transforming eventually into the great Meniri (“Mountains of Rock”), which explode east and west, forming a barrier between the civilized lands of the Ammas Aurë and the Waste beyond.

Adjoining Nicea in the west is Opelenea (“Majestic Land”), an arid realm of palms and dates with beautiful beaches, high hills, and stark deserts. For centuries, Opelenea has been the gateway between the Sunset Kingdoms of the west and the Empire of the east, its purple-sailed ships and caravans of camels carrying goods across the known world. Though nominally ruled by the Empire, Opelenea’s city-states and nomad tribes retain considerable autonomy, and Auran law often gives way to their ancient customs.

West of Opelenea is Kemesh (“River Land” in Old Kemeshi), last surviving satrapy of the ancient and sinister Kingdom of Zahar. It is a bleak realm where sorcerer-priests build cenotaphs on the backs of thousands, and evil spirits linger in silent tombs of stone. Kemesh’s power has waxed and waned over the millennia, but has never wavered in its malignancy and despotism.

To the south of Kemesh, in Ulruk, are the Ivory Kingdoms of Keita, Munde, and Kushtu, lands rich in salt, copper, gold, dates, and ivory. Shebatea (“Aromatic Land”) lies west of the Ivory Kingdoms, across the Narrow Sea. From this desert realm, the Sunset Kingdoms import slaves and courtesans, cinnamon and cassia, frankincense and myrrh.

North of Shebatea and north-west of Kemesh lies dusky Somirea (“Land of the Darkening Sky”), the most populous of the Sunset Kingdoms. A proud land with ancient traditions of mysticism, Somirea has fielded armies of war elephants and archers against the Auran Empire in many wars throughout history. Today Aura and Somirea are allied against the menacing hordes of the Skysos.

The Skysos hail from a vast steppe to the west, called Skysostan in the tongue of the Somireans. The Skysos have always been a dangerous people, but also a divided one, with their various tribes traditionally set against each other by the monarchs of the Sunset Kingdoms. Such factitiousness is now in the past, for the Skysos have united under a great kaǧan and seek a place for themselves among the great powers of Aurëpos.

North of Somirea and Skysostan lies Celdorea (“Land of the Wealthy”), a decadent land of greed, opulence, and treachery, thick with traders and slavers. Its capital is the great port-city of Zidium, from which it controls access to the rich resources of the Comean Sea. Celdorea was once the dominant power in the Ammas Aurë, but lost its maritime empire three centuries ago to the rising power of Aura.

Celdorea has recently taken advantage of the Empire’s overextension to reclaim its ancient control of the Syrnasos (“Flowering Isles”), an archipelago of islands glittering across the Ammas Aurë. The Syrnasans are famous for their skill with slings and ships, but notorious as pirates and thieves. Their storytellers claim that the ruins of an ancient civilization of winged men can be found on the remote peaks of their islands. Many explorers have sought out these ruins, hoping to learn the secrets of the Day Without Night, but few have returned, and none with answers.

North of the Syrnasos, east of Celdorea, is a collection of barbarian realms stretching from the coast to the rugged foothills of the perilous Jutting Mountains. Once the Auran province of Dappakosea, the region was conquered a century ago by a coalition of Danean tribes collectively known as the Jutlanders. These barbarians drove off the Auran legions and enslaved the native Dappakosean populace. Today the so-called Kingdoms of Jutland are aggressive and expansionist; their dragon-prowed raiding ships are becoming feared throughout the Ammas Aurë. Were the Jutlanders to be united by a high king, they might topple the thrones of Aurëpos.

The Kingdom of Rorn lies east of Jutland. Formerly the Auran province of Ivorea, Rorn became an independent realm when the Auran legions were driven off by the Jutlanders. Rorn might have fallen to the barbarians, too, had a great captain, Arëtar Pendaelen, not risen to rally the native Rornish tribes and halt the invaders. Rorn remains under constant threat from its bloody-minded neighbor but for now its stout people have maintained their freedom. Though never fully assimilated into Auran culture, Rorn still benefits from much of the old Auran infrastructure. Its culture mixes Auran civilization and Rornish folk-ways with the sylvan influence of the elves of Northern Argollë (“Eastern Light”).

Northern Argollë is the last remaining kingdom of the elves. Lying just east of Rorn, it is a beautiful realm of coastal and mountain forests, dotted by sylvan cities hidden amidst the woods. The dawn redwoods that grow on the ocean coast of Northern Argollë are said to be the most magnificent trees in all of Cybele, though few men are ever invited to see them.

The Pillars of Dawn separate Northern Argollë from the rolling hills of Southern Argollë. In ancient days, Southern Argollë was the forested heartland of the ancient Argollëan Empire, but the elves and the forests have both largely been eliminated. Nowadays it is the easternmost province of the Auran Empire. Southern Argollë extends eastward to the Tëhonaurë (“Deep Ocean”), which expands endlessly outward to the rising sun.

Bordering Southern Argollë to the south-west is Krysea (“Arrow-Land”), a stark, rugged country known for its stout archers and mercenaries. Now a loyal province of the Empire, Krysea resisted Auran dominance for over one hundred years. The remnants of the old border forts of the Krysean Wars still dot the landscape.

South-east of Krysea and Southern Argollë spread the black-faced Zaqāru Mountains (“Area Raised Above All Others” in Ancient Zaharan). Fiercely sloped in the west, the Zaqāru descend gently in the east, thereby forming the great plateau which was in ancient days the land of Zahar. Now that once-fertile highland has been reduced to ruin and become part of the great **Waste** that spans the breadth of the continent. The Waste is a dry and wind-blasted desert dotted here and there by ancient ruins said to date from before the Day Without Night, and populated by monstrous beasts, undead evils, and savage clans of barbarian beastmen who live for plunder and rapine.

Along the border between the Empire and the Waste, two rivers — the **Krysivor** (“Arrow River”) and the **Mirmen** (“Black Rock”) — run northeast from the Meniri Mountains down to the Tëhonaurë. The region between the mountains, the ocean, and the two rivers is known as the **Borderlands**. The Borderlands has been contested throughout recorded history and its landscape is littered with ancient fortresses, blood-soaked battlefields, and dread ruins, crumbling relics of the empires that once ruled there.

The Borderlands is secured by a fortified line of forts, but even when these have been fully manned, it has never been an entirely secure region. With so many Imperial legions sent west to confront the Skysos, the dangers facing the Borderlands are greater than ever. Monsters are slipping across the porous border to terrorize and plunder. Travel has grown perilous, and the border forts are becoming increasingly isolated and outmatched. The power structure of the region has begun decentralizing to local warlords and private armies.

[MAP]
