## Equipment Descriptions

###### Weapon Descriptions

All daggers and swords come with a simple sheath or scabbard. All other melee weapons come with a strap that can be hung from an adventurer’s harness, belt, or shoulder strap. Decorative scabbards can be purchased separately as adventuring equipment.

**Arbalest:** An arbalest is a heavy crossbow, pulled with the mechanical assistance of a rack and pinion or windlass. Historical examples include the late medieval arbalest and the Three Kingdoms era Chinese heavy crossbow. In Aurëpos, only dwarves manufacture arbalests in wide numbers, though all races and realms buy and use them.

**Axe, Battle:** This is a single- or double-bitted axe with a 24” to 48” haft, designed for battle and useable with one or two hands. Historical examples include the Scythian sagaris, Viking bearded and skeg axe, Celtic war axe, medieval battle axe, and Persian tabarzin. In Aurëpos, battle axes are popular with Jutlandic dwarves and humans and Meniri dwarves, as well as with beastmen.

**Axe, Great:** This is a double-bitted axe or long-shafted single-bitted axe, with a 48” or longer haft, requiring two hands to use. Historical examples included the Greek double-bitted labrys, Viking long bearded axe, and the English longaxe. In Aurëpos, great axes are popular with Jutlandic dwarves and humans and Meniri dwarves.

**Axe, Hand:** This is a single-bitted axe, with a 12” to 24” haft, balanced for throwing. Historical examples include the Frankish francisca, American tomahawk, and African mambele and kasuyu. In Aurëpos hand axes are popular with the Jutlanders (both dwarves and humans), the Meniri dwarves, and the various races of beastmen. They are favored by explorers throughout the continent because they can serve as tools as well as weapons.

**Bola:** These are throwing weapons made of weights on the ends of interconnected cords, designed to capture animals by entangling their legs. A character can use a bola to make a knock down or wrestling maneuver (as described in **Special Maneuvers**, p. XX) with a thrown attack. In Aurëpos, bolas are popular with the elves of Northern Argollë and the tribes of the Ivory Kingdoms.

**Bow, Composite:** A composite bow is a recurved bow made of laminated wood, horn, and sinew. Composite bows are time consuming and expensive to craft but offer a better combination of mobility and power than long bows or short bows. Historical examples include the Scythian horn bow, Chinese laminated bamboo bow, Greek and Roman composite bow, Mongolian composite bow, and Japanese yumi. Composite bows are popular throughout Aurëpos, but especially among the Kryseans, Northern Argollëans, and Skysos.

**Bow, Long:** A long bow is made from a single piece of wood, as tall as the person who uses it. Equal in range and power to more expensive composite bows, long bows require substantial strength (STR 9 or more) and cannot be used by mounted troops. Historical examples include the ancient Indian long bow, the Nubian long bow, and the Welsh and English long bow. In Aurëpos, long bows are popular in Northern Argollë, Southern Argollë, Rorn, Somirea, and the Ivory Kingdoms.

**Bow, Short:** A short bow is made from a single piece of wood, usually around 4’ tall. Short bows lack the range and power of either long bows or composite bows, but are cheap and fast to make. Historical examples include the Neolithic short bow and Comanche self bow. Short bows are popular among every race and realm in Aurëpos.

**Cestus:** A pair of armored battle gloves, made with leather strips and fitted with blades, spikes, and/or iron plates. Characters equipped with cestus may deal 1d3 points of lethal damage with a punch. In the Auran Empire, cestuses are used in gladiatorial contests.

**Club:** A club is any simple bludgeon used to batter opponents.

**Crossbow:** A crossbow is a bow mounted cross-wise on a stock with a trigger. It fires squat projectiles called bolts. Crossbows are light enough to pull by hand or with a quick drawing lever and are much easier to use than bows. Historical examples are the Greek gastraphetes, Roman arcuballista, Chinese handheld crossbow, and the medieval crossbow with cavalry cranequin. In Aurëpos, the best crossbows are of dwarvish make, although the Celdoreans, Niceans, and Tireneans also manufacture and use them. They are rare in Jutland and Rorn.

**Dagger:** A dagger has a small 6” to 12” blade, either single-edged for cutting, or doubled edged for stabbing. Daggers may be used in melee or for throwing. Historical examples include the Asian kris, medieval poniard, Japanese tanto, Scottish dirk, and Renaissance stiletto. Some daggers have blades coated with silver for use against enchanted creatures. Daggers are popular among every race and realm in Aurëpos.

**Dart:** A dart is any small projectile designed to be thrown. Most darts are fletched wooden shafts, ranging in length from 6” to 2’ long, but they may also be metal spikes or stars. Historical examples include the Roman plumbata, Macedonian kestros, and Japanese shuriken. In Aurëpos, darts are common in Krysea, Tirenea, and the Ivory Kingdoms.

**Flail:** This is a bludgeoning weapon derived from the agricultural flail with a striking head connected to the haft by a flexible chain. Flails are useable with one or two hands. Historical examples include the medieval ball-and-chain, Japanese rentsuru and nunchaku, and Chinese meteor hammer. Flails were highly favored among the old Zaharan nobility and remain popular in Celdorea, Kemesh, and Somirea.

**Javelin:** Javelins are short spears, 3’ to 6’ long, designed for throwing. Historical examples include the Greek javelin, Roman pilum and verutum, early medieval angon, and Zulu assegai. Javelins are popular among every race and realm of Aurëpos.

**Lance:** Lances are long spears, 12’ to 16’ in length, designed for mounted warriors. Despite their length, they can be used one-handed if mounted. If used on foot with two hands, a lance can be used to attack targets from behind an ally. Lances inflict double damage when used in or against a charge. However, any attack throw of natural 1 made with a lance breaks its shaft. Historical examples include the Greek xyston, Persian and Byzantine kontos, and medieval lance. Lances are used by cavalry throughout Aurëpos.

**Mace:** A mace is a bludgeoning weapon consisting of a 2’ to 3’ wood or metal shaft and a heavy stone or metal head, useable with one or two hands. Historical examples include the Egyptian bronze-headed mace, medieval flanged mace, Persian horseman’s mace, Russian pernach, and Slavic bulawa. In the Auran Empire, maces are popular among the crusaders and paladins of Ammonar.

**Morning Star:** This is any type of large mace-liked weapon with a spiked metal head. Any flails and maces too large to be used one-handed can also be treated as morning stars. Historical examples include the medieval morning star, German chain-morning star, English holy water sprinkler, Flemish goedendag, and Japanese tetsubo. Like flails, morning stars were popular in ancient Zahar and remain so in its successor states.

**Net:** This is a round, weighted cast net designed to entangle and entrap opponents. The chief historical example is the net of the Roman retiarius. A character using a net gets a +2 bonus on attack throws to wrestle or knockdown opponents (see **Special Maneuvers**, p. XX). In the Auran Empire, nets are often used in gladiatorial arenas. They are also popular in Northern Argollë and the Ivory Kingdoms.

**Polearm:** Polearms are two-handed slashing and piercing weapons with a metal head and a long wooden shaft. Polearms range in length from 6’ to 21’. Polearms can be used to attack from the second rank in melee, and inflict double damage when used in or against a charge. However, any attack throw of natural 1 made with a polearm breaks its shaft. Historical examples include the Thracian rhomphaia, Dacian falx, and Macedonian sarissa; the medieval bill, fauchard, glaive, guisarme, halberd, partisan, pike, ranseur, spetum, and voulge; the Chinese gun dao; and the Japanese bisento, nagamaki, and naginata.

**Sap:** A sap consists of a heavyweight material wrapped inside a leather sack. Used as a weapon, it provides a +2 bonus to attack throws made to incapacitate opponents (as described in **Special Maneuvers**, p. xx). Saps are only common among criminal sorts.

**Sling:** A sling is a projectile weapon, made of braided flax, hemp or wool cord, used to hurl small stones or lead bullets. Sling ammunition costs nothing and weighs 1/6 st. per 30 shots. Slings were used by all armies of the ancient world. Historical examples include the Hebrew shepherd’s sling and Greek peltast’s sling. Slings are popular among all races and realms in Aurëpos.

**Spear:** Wooden shafts, 6’ to 8’ in length, with metal heads designed for thrusting, spears are the main weapon of the common soldier. Spears can be used one- or two-handed. Characters armed with spears can attack from behind an ally and inflict double damage when used in or against a charge. However, any attack throw of natural 1 made with a spear breaks its shaft. Historical examples include the Hoplite doru, the medieval winged spear, and the Japanese yari. Spears are, by far, the most common weapon in the Auran Empire, used by every race and realm.

**Staff:** A staff is a common weapon made from a stick of hardwood 4’ to 6’ long, and used two-handed. (A one-handed staff is a club.) Historical examples include the English quarterstaff, Japanese bo stick, and Chinese gun. Staffs are widely popular in Aurëpos.

**Staff-Sling:** A staff-sling is nothing more than a sling attached to a staff. Like staffs, and unlike slings, staff-slings require two hands to use. A staff-sling can be used to hurl burning oil at longer range than it can be thrown, but the chance of a botch is increased to 1-3 on 1d20. A staff-sling can be used in melee as a staff, but if the wielder rolls an unmodified 1 on his attack throw, the sling breaks off from the staff. The chief historical example is the Roman fustibalus. Staff-slings are used throughout Aurëpos.

**Sword:** The classic weapon of knights and kings, the sword includes straight and curved slashing and thrusting blades of 30” to 40” in length useable with one or two hands. Historical examples include the Roman spatha, Viking sword, medieval knightly sword and falchion, Japanese katana, and Chinese jian and dao. Swords are popular throughout the military and noble classes of the continent, as well as among Jutlandic huscarls and Rornish knights.

**Sword, Short:** The short sword includes straight and curved slashing and thrusting blades, generally less than 30” in length, meant to be used with one hand. Historical examples include the Egyptian khopesh, Greek xiphos, Roman gladius, Japanese wakizashi, Arab scimitar, Persian shamshir, Turkish yatagan, and Indian talwar. After the spear, short swords are the most common infantry weapon in Aurëpos. Curved short swords are a common cavalry weapon in the Sunset Kingdoms.

**Sword, Two-Handed:** The two-handed sword includes straight and curved slashing and thrusting blades, 40” or more in length, requiring two hands to use effectively. Historical examples include the medieval longsword, the Renaissance zweihänder, Scottish claymore, Japanese no-dachi, and Chinese zhanmadao. Two-handed swords were favored by the ruinguards of ancient Zahar, but are not widely seen nowadays, except among the Jutlandic barbarians.

**Warhammer:** A warhammer is a bludgeoning weapon with a 2’ to 3’ wooden or metal shaft and a broad metal head shaped like a hammer. It is designed for crushing armor. The chief historical example is the late medieval warhammer, while the chief fantasy examples is Thor’s warhammer. In the Auran Empire, Warhammers are popular with crusaders of Türas and with dwarven vaultguards.

**Whip:** This is a long, single-tailed whip of the sort used to herd cattle. Used as a weapon, it grants +2 bonus to attack throws made to disarm or knock down opponents (see Special Maneuvers on p. XX). Whips are common throughout Aurëpos.

###### Armor and Barding Descriptions

Donning and removing armor is a time-consuming process that requires one round per stone of encumbrance. A character gains or loses +1 AC per stone of encumbrance until the armor is on or off. A character can, if desired, wear only parts of his armor, reducing encumbrance and/or avoiding penalties from sweltering weather at the cost of AC. Magic armor only provides its bonus when fully donned.

Armor (other than barding) is generally sized for man-sized creatures. Armor for small creatures does not cost any less than for man-sized creature, because of the technical complexity of working in miniature, but it weighs less. Armor for large creatures both costs and weighs more. Multiple the armor’s encumbrance and/or cost by the creature’s normal load / 5.

EXAMPLE: Halflings are small creatures with normal loads of 3 stone. Halfling-sized plate armor has a reduced encumbrance of (6 x 3/5) 3.6 stone, or 3 4/6 stone. Despite requiring less metal, the plate armor still costs 60gp, however. (A joke about the cost of children’s clothes would surely insult our halfling readership and thus has been edited out of this rulebook.)

**Arena Armor, Heavy:** A set of stylized heavy armor designed to expose the wearer’s attractive form and musculature while fighting. Depending on the wearer’s taste and style, heavy arena armor can include form-fitting leather, scale, or lamellar; sections of mail; and/or solitary pieces of plate on limbs and vital areas. Historical examples of heavy arena armor include that of the hoplomachus, provocator, and thraex types. Fantasy examples might include Morgana’s metal corset in Excalibur, Alia’s hauberk in Azure Bonds, and most of the armor seen in Xena: Warrior Princess. Heavy arena armor can also be used to simulate partial sets of heavier armor.

**Arena Armor, Light:** A set of stylized light armor designed to expose the wearer’s attractive form and musculature while fighting. Depending on the wearer’s taste and style, light arena armor can include form-fitting cloth or leather; thin straps of mail; and/or solitary pieces of plate on the limbs. Historical examples of light arena armor include that of the dimachaerus, myrmillo, retiarius, and secutor types. Fantasy examples might include Red Sonja’s chain mail bikini, He-Man’s battle harness, and most of the armor drawn by Frank Frazetta or Luis Royo. Light arena armor can also be used to simulate very partial sets of armor.

**Banded Plate Armor:** Banded plate armor is made of over-lapping 1mm-thick horizontal strips of laminated metal sewn over leather. It is comparable in protection to lamellar armor, and superior to chain mail. Banded plate is commonly worn as a cuirass with shoulder protection, with reinforced leather protecting the arms and legs. The chief historical examples are Sumerian overlapping plate armor and Roman lorica segmentata.

**Barding:** Barding is armor for non-humanoid creatures. It is made from a variety of materials (see the descriptions of each type of armor for details). Historical examples include Byzantine and Persian cataphract’s barding and medieval destrier’s barding. Most barding is sized for large animals such as war camels or horses. However, barding can be constructed for smaller or bigger creatures.

* Man-sized barding fits man-sized creatures such as war dogs. It costs and weighs 2/3 the weight of large barding.
* Huge barding fits huge creatures such as wyverns. It costs and weighs 3 times more than horse barding of the same type.
* Gigantic barding fits creatures such as war elephants. It costs and weighs 12 times more than horse barding of the same type.
* Colossal barding is armor sized to fit creatures such as ancient dragons and giant rocs. It costs and weighs 60 times more than horse barding of the same type.

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Barding | Colossal Creature | | Gigantic Creature | | Huge Creature | | Large Creature | | Man-Sized Creature | |
| Material | **Cost** | **Enc** | **Cost** | **Enc** | **Cost** | **Enc** | **Cost** | **Enc** | **Cost** | **Enc** |
| Leather | 2,400gp | 90 st | 480gp | 18 st | 120gp | 4 3/6 st | 40gp | 1 3/6 st | 25gp | 1 st |
| Scale | 4,500gp | 180 st | 900gp | 36 st | 225gp | 9 st | 75gp | 3 st | 50gp | 2 st |
| Chain | 9,000gp | 270 st | 1,800gp | 54 st | 450gp | 13 3/6 st | 150gp | 4 3/6 st | 100gp | 3 st |
| Lamellar | 18,000gp | 360 st | 3,600gp | 72 st | 900gp | 18 st | 300gp | 6 st | 200gp | 4 st |
| Plate | 36,000gp | 450 st | 7,200gp | 90 st | 1,800gp | 22 3/6 st | 600gp | 7 3/6 st | 400gp | 5 st |

**Barding, Half:** Half-barding only covers the front half of the mount. Half-barding costs and weighs half as much as full barding. However, the AC bonus from half-barding is lost if the creature (or its unit) is **flanked** or **vulnerable**. Half-barding is favored by cavalry that need protection from archery while still staying light.

**Barding, Spiked:** Spiked barding costs 50% more than standard barding of the same type. It adds +1 damage per die to the animal’s bite, claw, hoof, tail, tusk, or trample attacks. Historical examples include the wolf collars used on dogs and the tusk swords used on elephants.

**Chain Mail Armor:** Chain mail is made of small metal rings linked together in a pattern to form a 1mm-thick mesh. Chain mail is superior in protection to leather-based armors but inferior to metal scale or plate-reinforced armors. Chain mail is commonly worn as a shirt and coif, with lighter chain, ring mail, or hardened leather protecting the arms and legs and quilted padding below. Historical examples include Viking byrnies, Norman mail, and Roman lorica hamata.

**Helmet, Heavy:** This is a metal close-faced or visored helmet that completely covers the face, head, and neck. A heavy helmet must be purchased separately from a suit of armor. Wearing a heavy helm imposes a -1 penalty to surprise rolls and -4 penalty to Listening proficiency throws to hear noise, but offers a +2 bonus on d20 rolls made on the Mortal Wounds table. Historical examples of heavy helmets include the classical Corinthian helmet, Roman gladiatorial helmets, and the medieval armet, barbute, close helm, great helm, and hounskull.

**Helmet, Light:** This is any leather or metal open-faced helmet designed to protect the head and neck while maintaining unrestricted sight and breathing. A light helmet is included in the cost of any suit of armor. If a suit of armor is worn without a helmet, decrease the character’s armor class by 1 point and its encumbrance by 1/6 st. A light helmet can purchased separately from a suit of armor at a cost of 5gp, but provides no in-game benefit. Historical examples include the Illyrian, Phyrgian, Boeotian, Attic, and Galean helmets of Antiquity, the medieval bascinet, nasal helm, and spangenhelm, and the Renaissance burgonet and sallet.

**Hide and Fur Armor:** Hide and fur armor is made of stitched-together hair and skin of animals layered to a thickness of around 10mm. Unlike leather armor, the skins are not hardened with boiling. Hide and fur armor’s only advantages are that it is inexpensive, lightweight, and protective against cold.

**Lamellar Armor:** Lamellar armor is made of small bronze, iron, or steel plates laced together in parallel rows with silk, leather thongs, or cotton. It is similar to scale armor, from which it evolved, and comparable in protection to banded armor. Lamellar is generally worn as a cuirass over light chain or leather, and sometimes sewn to the backing. Lamellar would also include leather lames worn over chain. Historical examples include Mongolian lamellar, medieval brigandine and splinted armor, Japanese o-yori armor, and Roman lorica squamata.

**Laminated Linen Armor:** Laminated linen armor is made of 20 layers of laminated linen glued together to a thickness of 11.5mm. The composite material affords protection comparable to mail. Laminated linen armor usually consists of spaulders (shoulder armor), cuirass, and tassets (flaps covering the groin and thighs) worn with a bronze or iron helmet and pair of greaves. The chief historical example is Macedonian linothorax armor.

**Leather Armor:** Leather armor is made of hardened leather layered 5mm thick. Leather armor usually consists of spaulders (shoulder armor), cuirass, and tassets (flaps covering the groin and thighs). It is lighter but less protective then more reinforced leather armors such as ring mail. A historical example is Late Medieval cuir bouilli.

**Padded Armor:** Padded armor is made from quilted padding of linen or wool, layered to a thickness of approximately 10mm. Padded armor provides limited protection compared to hard armors. Historical examples include the arming doublet, gambeson, and padded jack.

**Plate Armor:** Plate armor is made from large bronze or iron plates, up to 2mm thick, worn over the chest and vital areas. Chain mail or other protective covering might cover exposed joints. Plate armor provides superior protection over banded plate and lamellar, having larger plates sewn onto a stronger backing. Plate armor is scarce in the Auran Empire setting. As the pinnacle of personal protection it can only be manufactured by master armorers. Only the dwarves, who have a surplus of such smiths, can field large numbers of infantry in plate. The volume of plate armor for sale on the Equipment Availability by Market Class table is halved in human or elven settlements. Historical examples include archaic panoply (worn with pauldrons, vambraces, and greaves), medieval plate-and-mail armor, Middle Eastern mirror armor, Eastern European plated mail, and Japanese tatami-do.

**Ring Mail Armor:** Ring mail armor is leather or padded armor that has a large number of small rings sewn directly over the foundation garment. Unlike chain mail, the rings are not physically interlocked with each other, so protection is inferior. Ring mail is closely related to scale armor, which sews leather or horn scales onto the foundation garment, and provides comparable protection. Historical examples include Frankish ring mail, Asian ring armor on leather, and Renaissance eyelet doublets.

**Scale Armor:** Scale armor consists of many small leather, cuir bouilli, or horn scales attached to a backing material of cloth or leather. Scale armor usually consists of a corselet or hauberk worn with leather or padded cloth. It is lighter than lamellar armor, which uses metal scales or lames over leather, and comparable to ring mail. Historical examples include Scythian scale armor, Egyptian scale armor, and early medieval scale armor.

**Shield:** A character with a shield equipped has his Armor Class increased by 1 point. Option rules that differentiate shields by their historical type (e.g. buckler, heater shield, kite shield) can be found in the ***ACKS Judges Journal***.

**Shield, Mirror:** This shield is entirely made of steel polished to a high reflectivity inside and out. A mirror shield can be used to check around corners, defend or reflect monstrous gaze attacks, and repel certain creatures. A character using a mirror shield to see his target suffers a -2 penalty to attack throws and does not gain the shield’s bonus to AC. However, he is immune to effects that require him to **behold** the target (see p. XX).

###### Adventuring Equipment Descriptions

**Adventurer’s Harness:** Also known as a burglar’s harness or delver’s harness, this is a set of belts, straps, sheaths, and cases designed to securely fasten items to one’s body without hampering movement. A character wearing an adventurer’s harness can ignore 1 stone’s worth of equipment when calculating encumbrance. It cannot secure heavy items, or coins and similar items. It cannot be worn over heavy armor.

**Archery Target:** A device for training troops in marksmanship. An archery target is a 2’ diameter board of soft wood, usually covered by thick cloth or cork. Trainees practice shooting at the target at various ranges, aiming to land the highest possible number of arrows into the target within a given time. The cost of archery targets is already included in the training costs for missile troops. An archery target weighs 2 stone (20 lbs).

**Army Emblem:** A silver or gold figurine mounted on a pole above the army’s standard. The emblem is treasured by the army as the symbol of its strength, honor, and glory. If an army’s standard is not provided with an emblem, its morale score is reduced by 1. Loss of an army’s standard and/or emblem reduces its morale score by 1 and counts as a calamity (p. XX). In the Auran Empire, the emblem of its armies is the winged sun.

**Backpack:** A backpack is a bag worn strapped on an adventurer’s back by a pair of shoulder straps. Using a backpack allows an adventurer to keep his hands free while carrying up to 4 stone (40 lbs) of equipment.

**Blanket:** A large woven covering that provides warmth and comfort. A character resting under a blanket is considered to have protection from frigid weather (p. XX) unless there is flurry or snowy precipitation. In this case, a tent is also required.

**Boardgame:** Rulers and officers enjoy the intellectual stimulation of a variety of strategic boardgames. The listed price is for a basic wooden board with bone or stone pieces. Vastly more expensive boardgames may feature inlaid woods, precious metals, and gem-carved pieces. Historical examples include the Egyptian senet (“passing”), Germanic hnefatafl (“king’s table”), Indian chaturanga (“game of four divisions”), Roman latrones (“game of brigands”), and Sumerian ur (“game of twenty squares”). In the Auran Empire, the most popular boardgame is kyrpeges(“wargame”).

**Bowquiver:** This all-in-one leather case is designed to carry both a bow and its arrows. The bow can be placed in the bowquiver already strung, and will rest securely with about half of its length extending out of the case. A special pocket on the front of the bowquiver can hold up to 20 arrows. The bowquiver can be hung from a belt hook at the waist or from a strap over the shoulder. An empty bowquiver counts as 1 item for encumbrance purposes, while a bowquiver with composite bow and 20 arrows counts as 2 items. In the Auran Empire setting, bowquivers are only available in Skysostan.

**Candles:** A candle is a pillar-shaped light source made of wax or tallow. When lit, a candle sheds bright light out to a 5’ radius and dim light to another 10’ (15’ total), burning for 6 turns (1 hour). Wax candles burn cleanly, but tallow candles produce a foul smelling smoke. Adventurers carrying tallow candles will never surprise creatures with **acute olfaction**.

**Craftsman’s Tools:** Craftsman’s tools include the various implements used by tradesman in their craft. Craftsman’s tools are required to make Craft proficiency throws. Each craft has its own specific type of craftsman’s tools. Craftsman’s tools weigh 1 stone.

**Craftsman’s Workshop:** A craftsman’s workshop has a full complement of craftsman’s tools and furnishings sufficient to allow up to 8 craftsmen to work together. A master craftsman must have access to a craftsman’s workshop in order to increase the productivity of journeymen and apprentices. Each craft has its own specific type of craftsman’s workshop. When set up, a workshop takes up 20’ x 20’ space.

**Crowbar:** A crowbar is a long, slender bar of solid iron with a curved hook on one end, used to lever against objects to apply force. 2’ to 3’ long and made of solid iron. A crowbar grants a +2 bonus to Dungeonbashing proficiency throws to open doors, smash crates, and so on. If used in melee, a crowbar counts as a club.

**Crutch:** A shoulder-height padded staff used by characters with missing or maimed legs who lack prostheses. A crutch has an encumbrance of 1 stone (10 lbs) and requires one free arm to use.

**Dice:** Dice are commonly available in many shapes and sizes, made from bone, ivory, talus, or wood.

**Disguise Kit:** A set of cosmetics, dyes, pigments, and wigs that can be used by a skilled practitioner to disguise his appearance.

**Earplugs:** Made of clay, cotton, or wax, these protect the wearer from loud sounds. Commanders may issue these to troops that will face harpies on the field of battle. Adventurers can wear earplugs loosely to reduce earshot by half or tightly to become **deafened**.

**Ear Trumpet:** A funnel-shaped tube of silver, wood, shell, or horn that, when placed in its wearer’s ear canal, raises the apparent volume of sound. A character using an ear trumpet when listening at a door or wooden wall can ignore the 5’ penalty to his earshot range from the door or wall. While using the ear trumpet, the character cannot wear a helmet and must hold it in his ear with one hand.

**Firewood Bundle:** A bundle of pre-cut dried logs about 5 lbs in weight, 12” in length and 6” in diameter. One firewood bundle will maintain a campfire for 1 hour. Note that firewood is not the construction-quality timber bought and sold in mercantile ventures. A full cord of firewood costs between 2sp and 1gp depending on the proximity to forests.

**Flag:** Symbols and signaling devices used by armies. Pennants are 2’ square and are carried as insignia by company- sized units or individual heroes. A pennant with pole weighs 1/4 stone. Banners are 6’ long by 2’ wide, and are carried as insignia by battalion- or regiment-sized units. A banner with pole weighs 1 stone. Standards are 12’ long by 4’ tall or more, and are carried as insignia for brigade-sized units, divisions and armies. A standard with pole weighs 4 stone. Standards may be topped by emblems (see above). If a unit or division is not provided with a flag of the appropriate size, its morale score is reduced by 1. Loss of a unit’s flag reduces its morale score by 1 and counts as a calamity.

**Grappling Hook:** These iron implements can be used to anchor a rope in place on their sturdy prongs. The hook may be thrown or attached manually by a climber. A successful attack throw is required to throw a grappling hook onto a target. The attack throw suffers a -2 penalty if the target is 11’ – 30’ away, a -5 penalty if the target is 31 – 50’ away, and a -10 penalty if the target is 50’ to 100’ away. A grappling hook thrown against a creature functions as a bola (p. XX) but suffers a -2 penalty to attack throws.

**Hammer (small):** The small hammer can be used for construction or as a mallet with iron or wooden spikes. If used in melee, it counts as a small weapon and deals 1d4 bludgeoning damage.

**Herb, Aloe:** Aloe, also known as burn plant, is a healing herb used to treat burns. A character with Healing proficiency can use 1 lb of aloe in a liniment to treat a patient with acid, cold, electric, or fire damage. The patient is healed 1d3 damage, or up to the amount of acid, cold, electric, or fire damage suffered, whichever is less. A patient cannot be treated with a liniment of aloe more than once per day. Applying the liniment takes 1 turn (10 minutes).

**Herb, Belladonna:** Belladonna, also known as deadly nightshade, is a poisonous flower. A character who eats 1 lb of belladonna within one hour of being infected with lycanthropy may make a Death saving throw to shake off the affliction. If the character fails the saving throw, however, he dies from the poison after one turn. Even if the poison is then neutralized or the character is raised from the dead, he will still be afflicted with lycanthropy, and further doses of belladonna will be of no use. If purified by an alchemist or poisoner, belladonna can become even deadlier, such that a few drops can poison a blade or cup of water (see p. XX).

**Herb, Birthwort:** Birthwort, also known as snakeroot, is a healing herb used as a remedy for snake bites and other poisons. 1 lb of birthwort can be applied as a poultice to a poisoned wound by an adventurer with the Healing proficiency. Used in this manner, it provides a +2 bonus on the Healing proficiency throw to *neutralize poison*.

**Herb, Bitterwood:** Bitterwood, also known as quassia, is a healing herb used to induce vomiting. A character with Healing proficiency can treat a patient who has ingested poison within 1 turn (10 minutes) with an emetic made from 1lb of bitterwood. Upon consuming the emetic, the patient must make a Death saving throw. If the save succeeds, the patient spends the next 1d3 turns purging himself of the poison, gaining the benefits of *neutralize poison*. If the save fails, the character still loses 1d3 turns purging himself, but it does not neutralize the poison. Administering the emetic takes 1 round.

**Herb, Blessed Thistle:** Blessed thistle, also known as spotted thistle, is a healing herb that helps wounds heal more quickly. A character with the Healing proficiency can use a poultice made from 1 lb of blessed thistle to treat a wounded patient at any time. If the patient rests, the number of hp he recovers from resting that day is doubled. If the patient does not rest, he recovers one-half the hit points he would have recovered if he had rested. Applying the poultice takes 1 round.

**Herb, Comfrey:** Comfrey, also known as bruisewort and knitbone, is a powerful healing herb. An adventurer with Healing proficiency can use a poultice made from 1 lb of comfrey to treat a wounded character immediately after a battle. This heals 1d3 damage. A character cannot be treated with comfrey more than once per day.

**Herb, Garlic:** Garlic causes a vampire to **cower** for one round when presented by Lawful character with a WIL of 13 or higher. A vampire will not cower more than once per turn from garlic.

**Herb, Goldenrod:** Goldenrod is a healing herb used to treat diseases such as rheumatism, gout, and consumption. An adventurer with Healing proficiency can use a tincture made from 1 lb of goldenrod to treat sick characters. Used in this manner, it provides a +2 bonus on the Healing proficiency throw to *cure disease*.

**Herb, Horsetail:** Horsetail, also known as snake grass, is a healing herb that slows bleeding and promotes clotting. A character with Healing proficiency can use a poultice made of 1 lb of horsetail to treat the wounds of an unconscious and possibly mortally wounded patient (with 0 hit points or fewer). Used in this manner, it provides an additional +2 bonus to the patient’s 1d20 roll on the Mortal Wounds table. A character with two ranks of Healing proficiency can use a poultice of horsetail to delay death with a proficiency throw of 18+ (one attempt per patient). A character with three ranks of Healing proficiency can use a poultice of horsetail to *delay death* (as the spell) with a proficiency throw of 14+. Applying the poultice takes 1 round.

**Herb, Lungwort:** Lungwort is a healing herb used to treat diseased and damaged lungs. A character with Healing proficiency can brew a tincture from 1 lb of lungwort to relieve a patient of the expedition movement penalty and rest requirements from permanent wounds (“lungs and heart damaged”). Brewing the tincture takes 1 turn (10 minutes) and the relief lasts for 4 hours.

**Herb, Willow-Bark:** Willow-bark is a healing herb that relieves aches, pain, and rheumatism. A character with Healing proficiency can brew a tincture from 1 lb of willow-bark to relieve a patient of the initiative penalty from permanent wounds (e.g. “stiff and scarred wounds” and “lasting wounds that ache in bad weather”), from inability to force march due to permanent wounds (“damage to hips and lower back” “damage to knee,” “lungs and heart damaged”), or from the attack throw and damage roll penalty from force marching. Brewing the tincture takes 1 turn (10 minutes) and the relief lasts for 4 hours.

**Herb, Wolfsbane:** Wolfsbane (dried aconite flowers) may drive off werewolves and other lycanthropes if a character strikes the monster in hand-to-hand combat with the sprig. If the lycanthrope fails a Death saving throw, it must flee as if rebuked. Wolfsbane can be used to make a plant poison (p. XX). A character foolish enough to eat a pound of fresh wolfsbane must make a Death saving throw or die after one turn.

**Herb, Woundwart:** Woundwart, also known as heal-all or lamb’s ear, is a herbal medicine with curative properties. An adventurer with Healing proficiency can use 1 lb of woundwart to make a tincture to treat injured characters. Used in this manner, it provides a +2 bonus on proficiency throws to *cure light injury* and *cure serious injury*.

**Holy Book:** A holy book is a parchment, papyrus, or vellum codex or scroll of religious writings. Access to a relevant holy book grants a +2 bonus on Theology proficiency throws. A typical holy book is 12”-13” tall, 9”-10” wide, and about 1.5” thick. It counts as 1/2 stone or three items for encumbrance purposes. Historical examples include the Egyptian Book of the Dead, the Ancient Greek Theogony, and the Chinese Tao Te Ching. In the Auran Empire, the Seven Radiant Scrolls are the most widely-read holy books.

**Holy Symbol:** A crusader must have a holy symbol in order to rebuke undead and maintain their code of behavior. These symbols will be different for each religion, but they are often worn as a necklace. In the Auran Empire, the holy symbol of Ammonar is the winged sun.

**Holy Water:** Holy water is water that has been sanctified by a divine caster of 7th caster level or higher. It is used in certain religious rites. Crusaders often carry vials of holy water to use as weapons against the undead. A chaotic enchanted creature splashed with holy water suffers 1d8 luminous damage for 2 rounds. Holy water cannot retain its holy power if it is stored in any other container than the special vials it is placed in when blessed.

**Ink:** This is a small pot of black ink. Cinnabar, red ochre, sepia, and verdigris ink cost twice as much. Purple ink costs ten times as much. Regardless of color, a pint of ink can be used to write or illustrate up to 2,500 pages.

**Journal:** A journal is a folded parchment or papyrus notebook used for writing ship’s logs, maps, illustrations, and book-keeping entries. A journal has 50 pages and is considerably less sturdy than a spell book. A historical example is the Roman pugillares membrane.

**Iron Spikes:** These sturdy pitons can be used to wedge doors open or spike them shut or to provide belaying points for ropes. A set of six iron spikes counts as one item.

**Laborer’s Tools:** A collection of tools useful to the unskilled laborer, including an axe, mattock, saw, shovel, and sickle. Laborer’s tools are required for troops to assist in construction projects. Laborer’s tools weigh 1 stone (10 lbs).

**Lantern:** A lantern is a portable container that holds a wick in oil. Lanterns consume one flask of common oil for each 4 hours (24 turns) of light. They shed bright light to a radius of 15’ and dim light to a radius of 30’. Lanterns can be closed to conceal the light or protect it from wind.

**Lock:** These are mechanisms designed to secure chests, doors, and other portals from those who lack the key. More complex locks, made by highly skilled locksmiths, might be available (Judge’s discretion); these impose penalties on a character’s proficiency throws to open it.

**Manacles:** These are metal fetters designed to shackle a creature’s hands or ankles. A character with Contortionism proficiency can escape from manacles in 1 turn with a proficiency throw of 18+. Breaking free of manacles through brute strength requires 1 turn and a proficiency throw to open doors with a -6 penalty. Any bonuses or penalties that would apply to a proficiency throw to open doors also apply to this roll. (For example, a character with STR 18 would gain a +12 bonus to break free of manacles, while a character with Dungeonbashing proficiency would gain a +4 bonus). Manacles of unusual material or size may impose a penalty on this proficiency throw.

**Mess Kit:** A collection of portable eating and cooking utensils designed for troops on extended military campaigns. An Auran legionnaire’s mess kit includes a mess tin, cooking pot, skewer, and dagger.

**Metamphora:** Designed to store special components, metamphora are ceramic jars inscribed with alchemical sigils and stoppered with copper seals. Metamphora come in an array of different sizes and shapes, as more valuable special components require sturdier, stronger metamphora to prevent leakage. Metamphora cost 5gp and weigh 1 stone for every 60gp of value they can store.

**Mirror:** A mirror can be used to check around corners, defend or reflect monstrous gaze attacks, and repel certain creatures. A character using a mirror to see his target suffers a -2 penalty to attack throws, and cannot use a shield, second weapon, or two-handed weapon. However, he is immune to effects that require him to behold the target (see p. XX).

**Musical Instrument:** A wide variety of instruments are available to bards and performers, including stringed instruments, percussion instruments, brass instruments, and woodwind instruments. Historical examples of stringed instruments are the cithara, harp, lyre, lute, psaltery, and zither. Historical percussion instruments include the castanet, chimes, drum, gong, sistrum, tambourine, and tympani. Historical brass instruments include the buccina, carnyx, cornu, and salpinx. Historical woodwind instruments include the aulos, flute, horn, pan pipe, and shawm. A common instrument costs 25gp. A superior instrument costs 105gp and adds +1 to Performance proficiency throws made with it. A masterpiece instrument costs 675gp and adds +2 to Performance proficiency throws made with it. Most instruments weighs 1 stone.

**Oil:** Common oil is burned in a lantern to give light. Common oil is usually olive oil, castor oil, or animal extract. Military oil is a weapon made of naphtha, and cannot be easily doused with water. Military oil may be thrown at monsters, dealing 1d8 fire damage for 2 rounds to the creature struck, or poured on the floor and ignited to burn for a full turn and delay pursuit.

**Pavilion:** A large round tent with an interior frame, measuring 24’ in diameter and 12’ in height. Pavilions are used by army leaders and division commanders as command posts and sleeping quarters. A pavilion weighs 72 stone (720 lbs).

**Pell:** A device for training troops in sword and shield techniques. A pell is generally a stout wooden post, man-height and about 6” to 1’ in diameter, planted firmly in the ground. The trainee practices striking the pell with a wooden sword and shield. The cost of pells is already included in the training costs for infantry troops. A pell weighs 15 – 30 stone (150 – 300 lbs).

**Pole, Wooden:** This pole is a shaft of wood 10’ long and 2” thick. Adventurers often carry 10’ poles to prod and poke areas that might be trapped, test the strength of ledges or floors, or measure the depth of pools. Although not heavy, wooden poles are cumbersome; they count as 1 stone for encumbrance.

**Pouch/purse:** These are 6” x 1’ bags of cloth or leather that can contain half a stone (5 lbs). They can be carried on a shoulder strap or on a belt.

**Prosthesis:** Nothing is as common as the sight of an old soldier with a missing limb. Most maimed characters, lacking the wealth to pay for a restore life and limb spell, replace the limb with a prosthesis. Basic prostheses are made of wood or bronze, but prostheses may be also made of iron (cost x2), silver (x5), or gold (x50). Decorations, leather or silk wrappings, and other adornment is extra. A character with a prosthetic arm or hand regains the ability to use a shield. Alternatively, the arm or hand may be replaced by a weapon, such as a club, hook, or short sword. A character with a prosthetic leg or foot can walk without use of a crutch, but does not avoid the movement and Dexterity penalties from loss of the limb. Dwarven machinists may be able to forge superior prostheses using gears and clockwork mechanisms. See ***By This Axe*** for information on dwarven machinists.

**Quill:** A writing implement made from the flight feather of a large bird such as an eagle, goose, or swan. A carefully-maintained quill can write 50 pages before replacement is required.

**Quintain:** A device for training cavalry troops in lance and sword techniques. A quintain consists of a shield or plank mounted on a swiveling pole. A club is affixed to the opposite end of the pole. The trainee practices striking the shield with sufficient velocity to avoid being struck by the club as it swivels around. The cost of quintains is already included in the training costs for cavalry. A quintain weighs 20 stone (200 lbs).

**Rations, Iron:** This food is dried, pickled, salted, smoked, or otherwise preserved from spoilage. Iron rations will remain digestible for two months in the wilderness and a week in the foul conditions of a dungeon. The cost for iron rations will vary depending on quality. The cheapest iron rations consist of hard, dried salted biscuits. Better rations include salted or pickled meat and dried, pickled, or preserved fruit and vegetables. A day’s iron rations counts as 1/6 stone (one item) for encumbrance purposes, while a week’s iron rations count as one stone.

**Rations, Standard:** This is fresh food. While cheaper and tastier than iron rations, standard rations do not remain edible for long: one week in the wilderness and one day in dank dungeons. The cost for this food will vary depending on quality. The cheapest standard rations include fresh bread, cheese, and butter, lard, or oil. Better standard rations will include bacon or other meat, eggs, beans, and fresh fruit and vegetables. A day’s standard rations counts as 1/6 stone (one item) for encumbrance purposes, while a week’s standard rations count as one stone.

**Rope, 50’:** This strong cord, woven of hair, hemp, or other fibers, can bear 50 stone (500 lbs). A 50’ length of rope weighs 1 stone.

**Rucksack:** A rucksack is a small backpack. It holds up to 2 stone (20 lbs).

**Sack, Large:** This is a 2’ x 4’ burlap, cloth, or leather bag that can contain 6 stone (60 lbs). It is normally carried over the shoulder and dropped when combat begins.

**Sack, Small:** This is a 1’ x 2’ burlap, cloth, or leather bag that can contain 2 stone (20 lbs). It is often tied to a belt or spearhead.

**Saddlebag:** This is a long pocketed leather sack that can contain 3 stone (30 lbs). It is designed to be slung over a mount or pack animal.

**Saddle & Tack:** This includes a leather and wooden saddle with metal fastenings, a leather and metal bridle and bit, and stirrups. Draft saddle and tack is used to harness to a cart or wagon or carry saddlebags; it cannot be used for riding. Riding saddle and tack is designed for the rider’s comfort. Military saddle and tack is designed for stability during combat. A character in combat without a military saddle must make a Paralysis save every time he is dealt damage or be knocked off the horse. See **Mounted Combat,** p. XX.

**Scabbard:** A scabbard is a hard sheath for a dagger, short sword, sword, or two-handed sword made of wood, leather, and/or metal. The purchase price of daggers and swords includes a basic scabbard. Scabbards can be purchased separately at 10% weapon cost (excluding masterwork value). Decorative scabbards can cost much more depending on ornamentation and material!

**Spell Book (Blank):** A spell book is a codex or scroll roll used by studious spellcasters to record spell formula. Each such grimoire has 100 pages of parchment. Each spell takes up one page per spell level (one page each for 1st level spells). A typical spell book is 12”-13” tall, 9”-10” wide, and about 1.5” thick. It counts as 1/2 stone or three items for encumbrance purposes.

**Stakes and Mallet:** These 18” sharpened wood shafts come in sets of 6 and are used to destroy vampires and/or pitch tents.

**Special Components, Miscellaneous:** When a living thing dies, a residue of its soul will linger in some its component parts, such as organs and cellular fluids. These parts are known as special components and can be tapped by casters and ceremonialists to power their magic items. While the best results are gained from rare components that are unique to the spells imbued into the item, an equal value of miscellaneous special components such as spider webs, plant roots, crushed bones, and so on can be used instead if desired. The caster suffers a -1 penalty on his throw per level of the spell when using miscellaneous special components in magical research.

**Surgical Saw:** Sharp, sturdy saws are used to saw through bone and tissue when amputation of the limbs is required. Use of a surgical saw gives a bonus on Healing proficiency throws to *cure light injury* or *cure serious injury* in mortally, grievously, or critically wounded characters who need healing to survive one of these permanent wounds. The bonus is +2 from a small saw and +4 from a large saw. See **Mortal Wounds** (p. XX) for more information. A large surgical saw weighs 1 stone (10 lbs).

**Tent:** Tents are made of animal skin, stitched together over a frame and staked with ropes. A small tent is 6’ x 4’ and can sleep two men. A small tent weighs 1 stone (10 lbs). A large tent sleeps eight men. It may be round (12’ in diameter) or square (10’ on a side), and weighs 4 stone (40 lbs). Characters inside tents can ignore the effects of drizzly, flurry, rainy, or snowy precipitation (p. XX). However, tents are automatically blown down in stormy winds. Historical examples include the Roman legionary tent and the Mongol yurt.

**Thieves’ Tools:** Thieves’ tools include long metal picks and probes, fine wires, tiny saws, miniature hammers, and an assortment of skeleton keys. Thieves’ tools are required to make Lockpicking and Trapbreaking proficiency throws.

**Thieves’ Tools, Expanded:** Expanded thieves’ tools includes drills, pliers, scissors, rods, blocks, pads, tweezers, shims, and a magnifying glass. They grant a +2 bonus to Lockpicking and Trapbreaking proficiency throws. If the thief rolls a natural 1 while attempting to pick a lock, the tools may make a Death saving throw (at half the thief’s level of experience) to resist breaking (see the Adventuring chapter, p. 91). The bonus does not apply to hijinks.

**Thieves’ Tools, Superior:** Superior thieves’ tools have the same components as expanded thieves’ tools but are crafted with incredible precision. They grant a +4 to proficiency throws to Lockpicking and Trapbreaking proficiency throws. If the thief rolls a natural 1 while attempting to pick a lock, the tools can make a Death saving throw (at the thief’s level) to resist breaking (see the **Adventuring** chapter,p. XX). The bonus does not apply to hijinks.

**Tinderbox:** This is a tinderbox used to start fires. Lighting a torch with flint and steel takes a full round, and lighting any other fire with them takes at least that long.

**Torch:** Torches are 1’ to 2’ long pieces of wood tipped with pitch. A torch sheds bright light out to a 15’ radius and dim light to a 30’ radius, burning for 6 turns (1 hour). If a torch is used as a weapon, it deals 1d4 fire damage. A single torch weighs 1/6 st. while a bundle of 6 torches weighs 1 st.

**Treatise:** Treatises are encyclopedic works on a specific general proficiency such as Animal Husbandry, Healing, Knowledge (astrology), or Profession (lawyer). A typical treatise is a 12.5” high x 10” wide codex with 1,000 parchment or papyrus pages stitched into a leather-wrapped wood case. Treatises come in four tiers equivalent to proficiency ranks. An adventurer can only comprehend and benefit from a treatise of one rank higher than his own in the proficiency. It takes 6 days of dedicated activity for an adventurer to read a treatise. After reading the treatise, the adventurer can thereafter reference it to re-roll a proficiency throw for a particular activity or query. The re-roll is made at the rank of the adventurer or the treatise, whichever is worse. Referencing a treatise is an ancillary activity requiring 6 turns (one hour). The adventurer can also use the treatise to train or re-train that proficiency (p. XX) or to add its value to his research library (p. XX). See ***Axioms 14: Codex & Scroll*** for more rules on books.

**Whistle:** A signaling device made of wood, horn, or similar materials. It emits a shrill, high-pitched sound audible up to one mile.

**Waterskin/Wineskin:** This container, made of hide or preserved animal bladder, will hold about 25 ounces of fluid. Humans typically consume 1 gallon (128 fluid ounces) of water each day, or 5 waterskins’ worth.

###### Clothing Descriptions

A character is considered to have protective clothing for purposes of frigid weather if wearing a fur-lined cloak or coat, a wool tunic, a pair of wool pants, a pair of leather or wool gloves, and a fur or wool hat. A character is considered to have protective clothing for purposes of sunbaked weather if wearing a hat or hooded cloak and either armor or a cassock, chiton, or robe. See **Weathering the Wild** on p. XX.

**Belt:** Embossed leather or silk belts are worn as a sign of wealth and status.

**Boots:** Low boots come to mid-calf. High boots come to the knee or thigh and are popular for riding.

**Breastwrap:** This is a band of wool or linen wrapped across the breasts for support. Silk breastwraps signify a woman of wealth and status. Historical examples include the Greek apodesmos and Roman mamillare.

**Cassock:** A cassock is an ankle-length close-fitting outer garment, buttoned up the front, often worn by crusaders, mages, and priestesses. Cassocks of fine make might include piping, sashes, and other decorations.

**Chiton:** The chiton is a linen or wool garment made up of a single rectangle of fabric, worn draped over the shoulders and girdled around the waist. A silk chiton is a mark of status and money.

**Cloak:** A cloak is a cloth, fur, or leather garment of knee to ankle length, worn outdoors like an overcoat. Cloaks usually include a hood. Adventurers often favor military cloaks, generally worn pinned on one shoulder for ease of movement and access to a sword.

**Gloves:** Gloves are garments covering the hands, worn for comfort, fashion, or protection. However, wearing gloves does not protect against curses or oozes. Thief abilities such as pickpocketing, lockpicking, or trapbreaking cannot be performed while wearing gloves.

**Hat:** A hat is a cap, fez, turban, or other headgear for protecting the head from the elements. Citizens of the Auran Empire rarely wear hats, but in the sunbaked Sunset Kingdoms they are quite common.

**Robe:** A robe is an ankle-length loose-fitting outer garment, open or closed at the front, sometimes worn with a belt or sash. In the Auran Empire they are worn by mages of the Tower of Knowledge, but in the Sunset Kingdoms, they are widely worn. Historical examples include the jellabiya, kaftan, and thawb.

**Sandals/Shoes:** Simple leather shoes or sandals are suitable for walking long distances.

**Tunic:** A tunic is a loose-fitting linen, silk or wool garment that covers the body between the shoulders and the knees. Depending on their quality, tunics can be simple and plain or dyed, decorated, and embroidered. They are available in sleeveless, short-sleeved, or long-sleeved variants. In cool temperatures, tunics are usually worn with matching trousers. Historical examples include the Greek exomis, Roman tunica, and Byzantine dalmatica.

###### Domestic Animals

Except as noted below, animals trained for war gain a +2 bonus to morale, an additional hoof attack, and the ability to attack using their natural weapons when mounted and charging. Only war-trained animals can be equipped with barding. See the ***ACKS II Monstrous Manual***for full characteristics for each animal; see **Mounted Combat** (p. XX) for additional rules on mounted combat.

**Camels:** Single- or double-humped dromedaries are the preferred mounts for treks through arid deserts. Camels have a speed of 50’ / 150’, a normal load of 30 stone (300 lbs) and a maximum load of 60 stone (600 lbs). Camels never become dehydrated unless they go without water for more than six months. Camels can be trained for riding or war, although they are so mean-tempered by nature that they’re basically at war with the rider already. War-trained camels do not gain an additional hoof attack nor the ability to attack when the rider charges.

.**Dog, Hunting:** Hunting dogs are fast, lean hounds trained to track and bring down prey by working in packs. They have a speed of 60’ / 180’, normal load of 2 stone (20 lbs) and a maximum load of 4 stone (40 lbs). Most hunting dogs can scent prey, giving them the equivalent of three ranks of Tracking proficiency due to their keen olfaction. Sight hounds cannot track but are faster, with a speed of 80’ / 240’. Hunting dogs can assist in hunting while on wilderness expeditions.

**Dog, War:** War dogs are heavy, fierce mastiffs trained to kill on command. While dangerous, they are capable of great loyalty to their masters when properly trained. War dogs have a speed of 50’/150’, a normal load of 6 stone (60 lbs) and a maximum load of 12 stone (120 lbs).

**Donkey**: Donkeys are sure-footed, strong, and stoic equines widely used to carry packs or pull vehicles. They are smarter and tougher than horses and, relative to their weight, considerably stronger. They have a speed of 40’ / 120’, a normal load of 15 stone (150 lbs), and maximum load of 30 stones (300 lbs). Because of their sure-footedness, donkeys can be taken into the depths of a dungeon to aid in transporting equipment or treasure, and their movement multiplier in mountain hexes is x2/3 instead of x1/2. Donkeys are also efficient grazers and, if given access to sufficient pasture, can be used in an army without a supply cost. If a donkey is affected by fear due to a failed saving throw or morale roll, it becomes paralyzedrather than frightened. It remains paralyzed, unwilling to move, until attacked or until the source of fright leaves its sight. Donkeys are usually trained as draft animals. They can be trained for riding, but not for war.

**Horse, Heavy:** Heavy horses are the largest of all equines, bred to be big, strong laborers. They have a speed of 50’ / 150’, a normal load of 40 stone (40 lbs) and maximum load of 80 stones (800 lbs). Most breeds of heavy horses are too placid to be trained for war, so heavy warhorses are very expensive. A historical example is the medieval destrier (warhorse). Heavy horses are bred throughout Aurëpos, though only the Rornish typically use them as warhorses.

**Horse, Light:** Light horses are built for speed and long-distance travel. They have a speed of 80’ / 240’, a normal load of 20 stone (200 lbs) and maximum load of 40 stones (400 lbs). Light horses can be trained for riding or war. Historical examples include the medieval palfrey and jennet (riding horse), medieval rouncey (warhorse), and the Marwari and Turkoman horse. Opelenea, Shebatea, and Somirea breed the finest light horses in Aurëpos.

**Horse, Medium:** Medium horses have been bred to be fast, strong and sturdy, but are meant for shorter distance travel. They have a speed of 60’ / 180’, a normal load of 30 stone (300 lbs) and maximum load of 60 stones (600 lbs). Medium horses are neither the best riding nor draft horses, but are ideal for war, and may be trained for any such purposes. Celdorea, Jutland, Krysea, Nicea, Rorn, and Tirenea all have medium horse breeds.

**Horse, Steppe:** Steppe horses are small but sturdy breeds with exceptional strength and endurance. Brave, clever, and easily trained, they are efficient grazers and, if given access to sufficient pasture, can be used in an army without a supply cost. They have a speed of 70’ / 210’, making them almost as fast as light horses. Steppe horses have sturdy conformation giving them a normal load of 25 stone (250 lbs) and maximum load of 40 stones (400 lbs). They have rugged endurance and can force march for one day without penalty, plus one additional day for each point of CON bonus. Steppe horses can be used for draft, riding, or war. In Aurëpos, only the Skysos breed steppe horses.

**Mule:** Mules are a hybrid of a donkey and a medium horse. They have a speed of 50’ / 150’, a normal load of 25 stone (250 lbs) and maximum load of 50 stones (500 lbs). Because of their sure-footedness, mules can be taken into the depths of a dungeon to aid in transporting equipment or treasure and their movement multiplier in mountain hexes is x2/3 instead of x1/2. Mules are primarily used for draft, but can be used for riding or war. War-trained mules do not gain an additional hoof attack.

**Ox:** An ox is a castrated bull, used for cart driving. They have a speed of 40’ / 120’, a normal load of 45 stone, and a maximum load of 90 stone. Oxen are efficient grazers and, if given access to sufficient pasture, can be used in an army without a supply cost.

###### Foodstuff Descriptions

**Animal Feed:** Superior animal feed is required for riding mounts, war mounts, workbeasts and other animals engaging in high-intensity labor. Inferior animal feed can be used for other animals, such as farm animals, when insufficient pasture is available.

###### Lodging Descriptions

**Inn:** An inn is an establishment that offers food, drink, lodging, and stabling. They are a common meeting place for adventurers. Slum inns are gambling dens, whorehouses, and flophouses, frequented by gamblers, harlots, and ruffians. Average inns include coaching inns, hostels, and traveler’s lodges designed for travelers and traders. Superb inns are the preserve of wealthy merchants and nobles.

###### Structure Descriptions

|  |
| --- |
| **AC:** During sieges, attack throws may be directed at structures. Every structure has an armor class, indicating how hard it is to harm the structure. Ordinary wooden construction has AC 1. Reinforced wooden construction has AC 2. Earthen construction has AC 4. Soft stone has AC 5. Thick, heavy stone has AC 6. Round structures gain a +2 bonus to AC due to the increased likelihood of attacks bouncing off.  **SHP:** A structure’s ability to remain intact despite damage is determined by its **structural hit points (shp)**. When a structure reaches 0 or less shp, it will collapse in 1d10 rounds. As a rule of thumb, a structure will have 1 shp per ton of weight.  Wooden structures are harder to damage than creatures. Man-sized or large creatures cannot deal damage to wooden structures. Light and medium ballista deal 1/10 damage to wooden structures. Huge creatures, heavy ballista, and light catapults deal 1/3 damage to wooden structures. All other artillery, gigantic creatures, and colossal creatures deal full damage to wooden structures. Spells deal 1/10damage to wooden structures, increased if the spell has an area of effect by a factor of (AOE square footage / 25).  Concrete, earthen, and stone structures are even harder to damage. Man-sized creatures, large creatures, light ballista, and medium ballista cannot damage stone structures. Huge creatures and all other artillery deal 1/10 damage to stone structures. Gigantic creatures deal 1/3 damage to stone structures. Colossal creatures deal full damage to stone structures. Spells deal only 1/50 damage to stone structures, increased if the spell has an area of effect by a factor of (AOE square footage / 25). Fractional damage to structures is rounded down.  Some spells specifically deal structural damage. This damage is multiplied by 5 against wooden structures.  **Unit Capacity:** The number of companies (120 troops each) that can defend a structure during a siege. Unit capacity does not reflect a structure’s available living space for long-term habitation. |

**Adit:** A horizontal passage in a mine. The first adit of a mine is always delved from a mountain side towards the vein of ore. A typical adit ranges from 5’ wide and 6’ high to 15’ wide and 15’ high. Larger adits may have canals for water. All adits connect to the surface or to an adit or shaft that does.

**Arrow Slit:** A narrow vertical or cross-shaped opening in a wall through which defenders can fire missiles. Missile attacks targeting creatures behind arrow slits suffer a -4 penalty, and the defenders gain a +4 bonus to Blast saving throws caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects. On a successful saving throw, creatures protected by arrow slits take nodamage, even if the effect would normally deal ½ damage. Arrow slits must be purchased separately; 1 arrow slit per 5’ of wall is standard.

**Barbican:** An outer fortification consisting of a gatehouse, two small round towers, and a drawbridge. A barbican may be situated outside the stronghold and connected to the walls with a short neck. A barbican can hold 4 units.

**Barracks Block:** A 140’ long, 30’ wide, and 10’ tall building divided into fourteen rows of double rooms, each row consisting of a larger inner room (9’ wide by 18’ long) connected by a wooden door to a small outer room (9’ wide by 12’ long). A barracks block can house a company of 120 infantry along with four subalterns and a centurion. This is the most common structure in Auran Imperial forts. A map of a barracks can be found in ***AX1: The Sinister Stone of Sakkara***.

**Battlement:** A defensive structure built atop walls to protect defenders from enemy fire. A battlement consists of a chest-high barrier (parapet) running the length of the wall, pierced with periodic rectangular gaps (crenellation) through which the defenders can fire missiles. Missile attacks targeting creatures protected by battlements suffer a -4 penalty, and the defenders gain a +4 bonus to Blast saving throws caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects.

**Building:** A stone or wood structure, 20’ high, 30’ square, with wooden doors, floors, roof, and stairs. The walls are 4” to 5” thick. A standard building can hold 1 unit. For variant dimensions, adjust price and shp proportionately.

**Cottage:** A cottage is a 20’ high, 30’ square wooden building with a thatched roof and earthen floor, suitable for a wealthy peasant family. Cottages are used throughout Aurëpos.

**Drawbridge:** A movable bridge that can be raised or lowered across a moat to control access to the stronghold. A standard drawbridge is 10’ wide, 20’ high, and 1’ thick. For variant dimensions, adjust price and shp proportionately.

**Gatehouse:** A fortified building protecting an entrance to a stronghold or settlement. The standard gatehouse is 20’ high, 30’ wide, 20’ long, with 10’ thick walls, with a metal portcullis that can be raised or lowered to control access. For variant dimensions, adjust price and shp proportionately. A standard gatehouse can hold 2 units.

**Granary/Warehouse:** A granary is a 180’ long, 30’ wide, and 10’ tall structure used to store goods. The wood planked floors of the granaries are raised 3’ off the ground in order to keep the grain dry and to allow air to circulate easily, while a steeply pitched roof helps shed rainfall. Loading bays ascend to the raised floor at either end, terminating in large oak doors. A granary can store up to 15,000gp of supplies, including 6,500 bales of hay, 3,500 bushels of grain, and 550 amphorae or barrels. A map of a granary can be found in ***AX1: The Sinister Stone of Sakkara***.

**Headquarters:** A headquarters building stands 125’ long and 85’ wide, with 5’ thick walls, and is divided into three parts. The front half is an open colonnaded courtyard, 45’ square, surrounded by a 15’ wide, 15’ tall veranda. Beyond the courtyard is a cross-hall, 25’ wide and 75’ long, with a 25’ roof. Behind the cross-hall lies an elevated shrine flanked by a pair of offices on either side. In the Auran Empire, such buildings are used to muster troops and to store legionary standards, pay chests, administrative files, and so on. A map of a headquarters can be found in ***AX1: The Sinister Stone of Sakkara***.

**Hospital:** A 75’ square building with a 25’ square interior courtyard open to the sky. The courtyard is usually dedicated to a deity of healing and may be decorated with altars, statuary, etc. The courtyard is surrounded by two rings of rooms, with a total of 10 wards where up to four patients can be treated each (40 patients total). Hospitals are built in most Auran Imperial forts and settlements. A map of a hospital can be found **in *AX1: The Sinister Stone of Sakkara***.

**Hut:** A hut is a 10’ square building with an earthen floor and thatched roof. Serfs, unskilled laborers, and other working poor generally live in such homely dwellings

**Keep:** A fortified tower within a stronghold that serves as the lord’s residence and final redoubt during siege. The standard keep is 80’ high and 60’ square, with 10’ thick stone walls. The interior features wooden doors and stairs between its 8 floors. For square keeps with variant dimensions, adjust price and shp proportionately. A round keep costs 50% more but has +2 AC. A standard keep can hold 12 units in a siege. During peacetime, it can house one company of 120 infantry. The Auran Empire rarely builds keeps but they are in wide use in Celdorea, Jutland, and Rorn.

**Moat:** A broad, stone-lined trench surrounding a stronghold to provide an obstacle against besiegement. Most moats are filled with water, but some are left unfilled. A standard moat is 100’ long, 20’ wide, and 10’ deep. For variant dimensions, adjust price proportionately. The structural hit points of a moat represent the amount of damage necessary to collapse the moat.

**Moat, Crude:** A hastily-built field expedient trench faced with loose earth, with little to no structural support. Crude moats are much cheaper and faster to build than ordinary moats, but prone to collapse and flooding. They take 200 structural bludgeoning damage each day in rainy weather conditions (p. XX) and require 1sp of daily maintenance per 100’ length. Crude moats are otherwise identical to ordinary moats.

**Palisade:** A fence made of wooden planks or stakes. Palisades are commonly built around army encampments to provide security. They are also used to circumvallate (encircle) besieged strongholds to prevent traffic in or out. The standard palisade is 10’ high, 100’ long, and 1” thick. A 100’ palisade can be defended by 1 unit. For palisades with variant dimensions, adjust price and shp proportionately.

**Palisade, Crude:** A hastily-built fence made of tree trunks, branches, and scrap wood. Crude palisades are much cheaper and faster to build than ordinary palisades, but prone to falling apart. They take 1 structural bludgeoning damage each day of rainy, stormy, or windy weather conditions (p. XX) and require 1sp of daily maintenance per 1000’ length. Crude palisades are otherwise identical to ordinary palisades.

**Rampart:** A broad embankment made of rock fragments, debris, or earth. Ramparts may be surmounted by parapets and used as defensive walls. The standard rampart is 10’ high, 100’ long, and 15’ thick. A 100’ rampart can be defended by 1 unit. For ramparts with variant dimensions, adjust price and shp proportionately. Earthworks such as mottes and siege ramps can be constructed in this manner.

**Roads:** Roads increase the speed of creatures traveling on them by 50% (x3/2 movement modifier). They increase the speed of wheeled vehicles traveling on them by 50%, or by 100% if the vehicle’s driver has Driving proficiency. Leveled earth roads provide no benefit if the weather is rainy or the ground is muddy or snowy (see p. XX) and can never increase a vehicle’s speed to more than 60’ per round or 12 miles per day. Gravel roads provide no benefit if the ground is muddy or snowy and can never increase a vehicle’s speed to more than 60’ per round or 18 miles per day. Paved roads provided no benefit if the ground is snowy.

S**haft:** A vertical or inclined passage sunk down from the surface towards a vein of ore. A typical shaft is between 3’ and 10’ in diameter. Shafts can be entry points or vents. Entry shafts will be straight and have footholds carved into the shaft walls. Ventilation shafts often bend and turn. There will usually be at least one shaft every 100’ to 200’ of adit.

**Stable-Barracks:** A 200’ long, 50’ wide, and 15’ tall building built to house one company of 60 cavalry, along with four subalterns (platoon commanders) and one tribune (company commander), collectively spread across the block’s twelve rows. Rows are sub-divided lengthwise into two 24’ wide sections, each with an inner living quarters (16’ wide, 9’ long, and 8’ tall) connected by wooden doors to outer stables (16’ wide, 15’ long, and 10’ tall) that open up to the outside. Ladders rise from the stables to hay-lofts (16’ wide, 9’ long, and 7’ tall) that sit above the living quarters. Stable-barracks are widely used in Auran Imperial forts. A map of a stable-barracks can be found in ***AX1: The Sinister Stone of Sakkara***.

**Tower:** A tall, fortified structure within a stronghold. Towers are typically higher than the surrounding walls, offering the defenders a vantage point from which to view the surrounding area as well as a wide field of fire for missiles. Towers have 5’ thick round walls, with wooden doors, floors, and stairs. Towers have one story per 10’ of height. For round towers with variant dimensions, adjust price and shp proportionately. Square towers cost two-thirds as much but are -2 AC. A small or medium tower can hold 1 unit. A large tower can hold 2 units. A huge tower can hold 5 units.

**Townhouse:** A townhouse is a 30’ square two-story building with a wooden floor and stairs and thatched roof. Wealthy yeomen, master craftsmen, merchants, and other professionals might live in such a dwelling.

**Trap:** Any of a variety of devices used to capture or kill trespassers, often put in place by thieves when establishing hideouts and wizards when constructing dungeons. Trappers can create some of these traps (p. XX). The traps presented in this book include:

* *Arrow-Firing Trap*: When triggered, an arrow fires from a hidden location to attack the triggering creature as a 1st level fighter for 1d6+1 piercing damage. The arrow can be poisoned if desired.
* *Ceiling Collapse Trap*: When triggered, ceiling bricks or stones collapse. Each creature in a 10’ radius must make a Blast saving throw. If the save fails, the creature suffers 1d6 bludgeoning damage. If the save succeeds, the creature suffers half that damage.
* *Dart-Firing Trap*: When triggered, a dart fires from a hidden location to attack the triggering creature as 1st level fighter for 1d4+1 piercing damage. The dart is usually poisoned.
* *Deadfall Trap*: When triggered, heavy object falls from overhead tree branches, rafters, etc. Each creature in a 5’ radius must make a Blast saving throw. If the save fails, the creature suffers 1d12 bludgeoning damage. If the save succeeds, the creature dodges the deadfall. This trap can only be built outdoors. A trapper can create this trap in the wilderness.
* *Excavated Earth Pit Tarp*: A 10’ x 10’ hole in the ground covered with leaves and brush. Any creature crossing the pit falls in, taking 1d6 bludgeoning damage per 10’ fallen. A spiked floor or a trap door can be added for an additional cost. If spikes are added, 1d4 strike each character for 1d6 piercing damage. If a trap door is added, it makes the pit harder to set off with a 10’ pole (1 instead of 1-2 on d6).
* *Needle-Firing Trap*: When triggered, a small needle pops out of a lock to attack the triggering creature as a 1st level fighter for 1 piercing damage. The needle is virtually always poisoned.
* *Portcullis Trap*: When triggered, a portcullis falls suddenly downward. The creature who triggered the trap must make a Blast saving throw. If the save succeeds, the creature can choose on which side of the portcullis it lands. If the save fails, the creature suffers 1d6 piercing damage and the Judge chooses on which side of the portcullis it lands and might apply other effects.
* *Rock-Cut Pit Trap*: A 10’ x 10’ smooth-hewn pit cut into the rock and concealed by a rug or floorboard. A spiked floor or a trap door can be added for an additional cost. If spikes are added, 1d4 strike each character for 1d6 piercing damage. If a trap door is added, it makes the pit harder to set off with a 10’ pole (1 instead of 1-2 on d6).
* *Rolling Rock Trap:* When triggered, a 5’ wide boulder rolls out from a hidden location along a 30’ long path. Each creature in the boulder’s path must make a Blast saving throw. If the save fails, the creature suffers 1d6 bludgeoning damage and is knocked **prone**.
* *Scything Blade Trap:* When triggered, a scything blade swings out from a hidden location. Each creature in a 10’ line must succeed on a Blast saving throw or suffer 1d8 slashing damage.
* *Spring Snare Trap*: When triggered, a snare connected to a taut branch snare fastens around the legs of creatures in a 5’ diameter area of effect. Each creature in the area must succeed on Paralysis saving throw or suffer 1d6 bludgeoning damage and be hoisted 10’ in the air and **restrained** until he escapes or cuts free (1 hp). When a creature escapes or cuts free, it falls to the ground unless protective measures are taken, suffering an additional 1d6 bludgeoning damage per 10’ of fall.
* *Swinging Log Trap:* When triggered, a heavy log swings out from a hidden location. Each creature in a 10’ line must succeed on a Blast saving throw or suffer 1d8 bludgeoning damage.
* *Whipping Branch Trap*: When triggered, a spike-covered branch swings out from a nearby tree to attack the triggering creature as a 1st level fighter for 1d6+1 piercing damage.

**Trap Accessory:** These are additional mechanisms that can be added to make traps more dangerous.

* *Pit Spikes:* A set of spikes rising from the floor of the pit. Creatures that fall into the pit are impaled on 1d4 spikes, each dealing 1d6 piercing damage in addition to damage caused by falling.
* *Pit Cover, Concealed Trap Door*: A pressure-sensitive trap door that only triggers when an appropriate weight is on top. The weight requirement makes it harder to set off with a 10’ pole (1 instead of 1-2 on d6).
* *Pit Cover, Concealed Spring-Loaded Trap Door*: A pressure-sensitive trap door (as above) that springs shut after being triggered. It cannot be opened from inside the pit except by Dungeonbashing or Trapbreaking.

**Villa:** The domicile of a high-ranking noble and his family, the 75’-square villa is quite luxurious. At its center is an open-air peristyle garden bordered by a colonnaded arcade which grants access to the villa’s various rooms, including multiple bedrooms, formal dining room, reception room, private bath, private shrine, and private stables. A map of a villa can be found in ***AX1: The Sinister Stone of Sakkara***.

**Wall:** A fortified barrier used to protect a stronghold or settlement from besiegers. A stone wall is 100’ long and 10’ thick, with height ranging from 20’ to 60’ high. For walls with variant dimensions, adjust price and shp proportionately. Walls may be built up to 200’ high, but cost is doubled for construction over 60’ high. A 100’ length of wall can be defended by 1.5 units stationed at the top of the wall, plus an additional 1.5 units per 10’ of height, firing through arrow slits. (Arrow slits, battlements, drawbridges, and other features must be purchased separately. 1 arrow slit per 5’ per story is required for a multi-story wall to be defended with arrows.) Add up the length of all sections of wall to determine the number of units that can defend them.

###### Vehicle Descriptions

**Cart, Large:** A large cart is an open, two-wheeled vehicle meant for shipment. It may be pulled by one or two heavy horses. One ox, two mules, or two medium horses can be substituted for 1 heavy horse. If the cart is pulled by only one heavy horse, it can transport up to 80 stone at 60’ per turn, or up to 120 stone at 30’ per turn. If pulled by 2 heavy horses, it can transport up to 160 stone at 60’ per turn, or up to 240 stone at 30’ per turn. Carts can only move through deserts, mountains, forests, or swamps if a road is available. Carts can be driven by any character, but travel faster on roads if the driver has Driving proficiency. A large cart has AC 0 and 2 shp.

**Cart, Small:** A small cart is an open, two-wheeled vehicle meant for personal transport. It may be pulled by one or two mules. If the cart is pulled by only one mule, it can transport up to 50 stone at 60’ per turn, or up to 75 stone at 30’ per turn. If pulled by two mules, it can transport up to 100 stone at 60’ per turn, or up to 150 stone at 30’ per turn. Carts can only move through deserts, mountains, forests, or swamps if a road is available. Carts can be driven by any character, but travel faster on roads if the driver has Driving proficiency. A small cart has AC 0 and 2 shp.

**Chariot, Heavy:** A heavy chariot is an open, two- or four-wheeled vehicle used in warfare. The cab is constructed from slates of hardwood and reinforced with bronze. The axle is set beneath the center of the cab, adding to strength of construction. The chariot’s wheels are about 5’ in diameter. Its wheel track is about 7’ wide, while its total length is 15’. The cab measures 4’6” wide, 3’3” deep, and 3’9” high, with room for four man-sized creatures, one of whom must be the driver. The cab includes three built in weapon-cases, with room for a composite bow, 3 javelins, and 20 arrows. The armored cab provides its occupants with a +2 AC bonus against attacks to the front and flank. A heavy chariot has AC 2 and 2 shp.

A heavy chariot may be pulled by two, three, or four creatures whose normal loads add up to at least 80 stone. When used in war, heavy chariots are typically pulled by three medium horses or four light horses. The chariot can transport up to the harnessed creatures’ combined normal load at half the harnessed creatures’ speed, or up to the harnessed creature’s combined maximum load at one quarter the harnessed creatures’ speed. The chariot cannot exceed 90’ per turn in any case. Heavy chariots can only move through deserts, forests, mountains, or swamps if a road is available. Chariots can be driven by any character, but travel faster on roads if the driver has Driving proficiency. Historical examples include the Neo-Assyrian chariot, Chinese Anyang-type chariot, and Classical Indian chariot.

**Chariot, Light:** A light chariot is an open, two-wheeled vehicle used for hunting, racing, or warfare. It is built for speed, with a lightweight frame of elm or ash covered by hide. The axle is set at the very rear of the body for maximum mobility and stability. The chariot’s wheels are about 2’6” in diameter. Its wheel track is about 5’9” wide, while its total length, including harnessed creatures, is 11’6”. The cab measures 3’3” wide, 1’8” deep, and 2’6” high, with room for two man-sized creatures, one of whom must be the driver. The cab includes three built in weapon-cases, with room for a composite bow, 3 javelins, and 20 arrows. A light chariot has AC 0 and 1 shp.

A light chariot may be pulled by one or two creatures whose normal loads add up to at least 40 stone. When used in war, light chariots are typically pulled by two light horses. The chariot can transport up to the harnessed creatures’ combined normal load at ¾ the harnessed creatures’ speed, or up to the harnessed creature’s combined maximum load at 3/8 the harnessed creatures’ speed. The chariot cannot not exceed 180’ per turn in any case. Light chariots can only move through deserts, forests, mountains, or swamps if a road is available. Chariots can be driven by any character, but travel faster on roads if the driver has Driving proficiency. Historical examples include the New Kingdom Egyptian chariot, the Mycenaean rail-chariot, and the Celtic chariot.

**Chariot, Medium:** A medium chariot is an open, two-wheeled vehicle used in hunting and warfare. The cab is constructed from slates of hardwood. The axle is set beneath the center of the cab, adding to strength of construction. The chariot’s wheels are about 3’ in diameter. Its wheel track is about 6’6” wide, while its total length is 13’. The cab measures 4’ wide, 3’ deep, and 3’ high, with room for three man-sized creatures, one of whom must be the driver. The cab includes three built in weapon-cases, with room for a composite bow, 3 javelins, and 20 arrows. The sturdily-built cab provides its occupants with a +1 AC bonus against attacks to the front and flank. A medium chariot has AC 1 and 1 shp.

A medium chariot may be pulled by two or three creatures whose normal loads add up to at least 60 stone. When used in war, medium chariots are typically pulled by two medium horses or three light horses. The chariot can transport up to the harnessed creatures’ combined normal load at 2/3 the harnessed creatures’ speed, or up to the harnessed creature’s combined maximum load at 1 / 3 the harnessed creatures’ speed. The chariot cannot exceed 120’ per turn in any case. Medium chariots can only move through deserts, forests, mountains, or swamps if a road is available. Chariots can be driven by any character, but travel faster on roads if the driver has Driving proficiency. Historical examples include the Hittite Anatolian-type chariot and the Mycenaean box chariot.

**Howdah:** A howdah is a carriage mounted on the back of a creature of huge, gigantic, or colossal size. Howdahs of any size can be built for riding or war. Riding howdah are lightweight wicker frames covered by hide. War howdah are sturdy wooden towers with crenellations; these cost and weigh twice as much. Both types are often laminated, painted, and opulently decorated.

* Colossal howdah are 12’ long, 10’ wide, and 4’6” tall. They weigh 60 stone (600 lbs), have AC 0, 1 shp, and can carry 20 man-sized creatures (up to 40 if squeezed). War howdah of this size weigh 120 stone (1,200 lbs) and have AC 1 and 2 shp. The occupants gain a +4 AC bonus and a +4 bonus to saving throws versus Blast caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects.
* Gigantic howdah are 7’ long, 5’ wide, and 4’ tall. They weigh 18 stone (180 lbs), have AC 0, 1 shp, and can carry 6 man-sized creatures (up to 12 if squeezed). War howdah of this size weigh 36 stone (360 lbs) and have AC 1 and 1 shp. The occupants gain a +4 AC bonus and a +4 bonus to saving throws versus Blast caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects.
* Huge howdah are 4’ long, 3’ wide, and 3’ tall. They weigh 6 stone (60 lbs), have AC 0, 1 shp, and can carry 2 man-sized creatures (up to 4 can squeeze in, but the occupants suffer a -4 penalty to attack throws and -2 AC penalty due to the confined quarters). War howdah of this size weigh 15 stone (150 lbs) and have AC 1 and 1 shp. The occupants gain a +3 AC bonus and a +3 bonus to saving throws versus Blast caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects.

**Palanquin:** A palanquin consists of a seat or platform mounted between a pair of long sturdy poles. The passenger or passengers sit upon the seat or platform while the palanquin itself is borne on the shoulders of laborers who operate in teams of 2 to 12. The laborers march at a smooth gait and can achieve speeds of up to 3 miles per hour. While this is no faster than walking, the passengers of a palanquin don’t mind: palanquins are the most luxurious and comfortable way to travel available, short of magic.

* A small palanquin is a 4’ long, 4’ wide, and 4’ tall wooden chair mounted between a pair of poles extending 5’ to the front and rear. A pair of laborers can carry one passenger (or up to 15 stone) at an encounter speed of 60’ or two passengers (up to 35 stone) at 30’. A small palanquin weighs 5 stone (50 lbs). Small palanquins are a common mode of transport for patricians in Auran cities, where the crowded conditions make it hard to move fast anyway.
* A medium palanquins is a 4’ long, 6’ wide, and 4’ tall wooden cabin mounted between a pair of poles extending 5’ to the front and rear. A team of four laborers can carry one passenger (or up to 18 stone) at an encounter speed of 90’ or two passengers (or up to 30 stone) at 60’. A medium palanquin weighs 10 stone (100 lbs). The cabin provides its occupants with a +1 AC bonus. Medium palanquins are a popular vehicle for patricians traveling between nearby cities.
* A large palanquin is an 8’ long, 6’ wide, and 6’ tall wooden cabin mounted between a pair of poles extending 7.5’ to the front and rear. A team of eight laborers can carry two passengers (or up to 36 stone) at an encounter speed of 90’ or four passengers (or up to 60 stone) at 60’. A large palanquin weighs 20 stone (200 lbs). Large palanquins are ornate and luxurious, with rare wood inlay, polished poles, silk curtains, and more. Large palanquins are usually the preserve of rich and powerful patricians traveling between cities.
* A huge palanquin is a 10’ long, 6’ wide, 6’ tall wooden carriage mounted between a pair of poles extending 10’ to the front and rear. A team of twelve laborers can carry three passengers (or up to 54 stone) at 90’ or six passengers (or up to 90 stone) at 60’. A huge palanquin weighs 30 stone (300 lbs). Huge palanquins are as luxurious as mobile palaces, the exterior often gilded or decorated with artwork or statuary, the poles adorned with ivory handles or carved into intricate sculptures. The passengers recline on padded mattresses with silk cushions and curtains ensuring they travel in ease and comfort. An Exquisitrix of the Temple of Nasga, a Raja of Somirea, or the spouse of a Tarkaun might ride in such a litter.

Adventurers sometimes find palanquins useful when undertaking wilderness expeditions. Palanquins can be used to transport supplies along mountain passes and bad terrain that would be impassable to wheeled vehicles. Medium, large, and huge palanquins provide protection for their occupant from drizzly, flurry, rainy, and snowy precipitation (p. XX).

**Wagon:** A wagon is a four-wheeled open vehicle designed to transportpeople and property over long distances. A wagon is generally drawn by two or four heavy horses. One ox, two mules or two medium horses can be substituted for one heavy horse. If the wagon is pulled by two heavy horses, it can transport up to 160 stone at 60’ per turn, or 320 stone at 30’ per turn. If the wagon is pulled by four heavy horses, it can transport up to 320 stone at 60’ per turn, or up to 640 stone at 30’ per turn. Wagons can only move through deserts, mountains, forests, or swamps if a road is available. Wagons can be driven by any character, but travel faster on roads if the driver has Driving proficiency. A wagon has AC 1 and 3 shp.

###### Vessel Descriptions

**Barge:** A barge is a flat-bottomed vessel intended to carry cargo and passengers across rivers or coastal waters. Though they share the shallow draft of galleys, they are propelled by sail. While most barges are small, some barges reach titanic size.

* *Small:* The small barge is a 15-ton one-masted square-sailed vessel with a 50’ length, 13’ beam, and 2’ draft. It requires 5 sailors to crew and can carry 2,000 stone (20,000 lbs) of cargo.
* *Large:* The large barge is a 60-ton one-masted square-sailed vessel with a 115’ length, 20’ beam, and 3’ draft. It requires 10 sailors to crew and can carry 7,000 stone (70,000 lbs) of cargo.
* *Huge:* The huge barge is a 1,150-ton two- or three-masted square-sailed vessel with a 230’ length, 60’ beam, and 10’ draft. It requires 40 sailors to crew and can carry 135,000 stone (675 tons) of cargo.

**Boat, Row:** A rowboat is a small, flat-bottomed open vessel with a single pair of oars. It a has a length of 12’, has a beam (width) of 6’, and has a draft (surface depth) of 1’ when in the water. A rowboat requires a crew of 1 and can carry up to 100 stone (1,000 lbs).

**Boat, Sail:** A sail boat is flat-bottomed vessel with a single mast and sail. It has a length of 30’, has a beam of 10’, and has a draft of 2’ when in the water. A sail boat requires a crew of 3 and can carry up to 500 stone (5,000 lbs). A sail boat has an open deck, but a roofed cabin can be added at a cost of 1,000gp. Historical examples include the dhow and felucca.

**Canoe:** A canoe consists of a frame of light wood wrapped with bark, hides, canvas, or other waterproofed covering. Canoes are primarily used on rivers and in swamps. Canoes have a 15’ length, 5’ beam, 6” draft, and can carry 1 rower and up to 60 stone (600 lbs) of cargo. Canoes can be carried overland by two people, counting as 5 stone of encumbrance for each.

**Galley:** A galley is a sleek, slender vessel designed to voyage under sail or oar. Galleys can travel extremely swiftly across short distances, but they require large crews and are at great risk from sea storms. They lack any sleeping accommodations for their crew and are generally beached each night. Galleys come in a variety of sizes, each named for the number of rowers that man one side of a single row of oars.

Regardless of size, each galley has a mainmast and a foremast. The 1.5- and 2.5-rower galleys are built so that the mainmast can be raised or lowered swiftly and stowed without disturbing the rowers. The 2-, 3-, 4-, 5, 6-, and 8-rower galleys have bulky mainmasts that interfere with rowing when stowed. If a 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 6-, or 8-rower galley has its main mast stowed on board, its oar sprint speed and oar cruise speed are reduced by 120’ per round because there’s not enough room for the rowers to work. These galleys usually leave their mainmasts ashore when going in to battle to avoid losing speed under oar. If a 2-, 3-, 4-, 6-, or 8-rower galley travels under sail without its main mast, its sail speed is reduced by 120’ per round and its sail voyage speed by 15 miles per day. 1.5- and 2.5-rower galleys do not face these difficulties and are better suited for adventurers, pirates, and privateers.

* *1-rower:* A 15-ton aphract (open-decked) “patrol boat” with one bank of oars, 15 per side, each rowed by one rower, creating an oar system with one rower per file. It has a length of 65’, beam of 13’9”, and a draft of 2’4”. It requires 3 sailors and 30 rowers. It has a cargo capacity of 500 st. It can carry 1 war machine weighing up to 150 st. The chief historical examples are the Roman navis lusoria and navis actuaria.
* *1**.5-rower:*A 20-ton aphract “corvette” with two banks of oars, 9 upper and 16 lower per side, each rowed by one rower, creating an oar system with one-and-a-half rowers per file. It has a length of 80’, beam of 14’3”, and a draft of 2’6”. It requires 5 sailors and 50 rowers and can carry 5 marines. It has a cargo capacity of 750 st. It can carry 2 war machines weighing up to 150 st each. The room afforded by halving the number of oars on the upper bank enables the 1.5-rower to easily stow its main mast. The 1.5 rower is primarily used by pirates, who face unique challenges: Although galleys are faster than sailing ships for short distances, they cannot sustain speed long enough to capture a sailing ship with the wind on its side. The 1.5-rower is able to operate under main sail and oar when approaching, enabling it to overtake the sailing ship, and then quickly re-configure to just oars for maneuver and boarding. The chief historical example is the Mediterranean hemiola.
* *2-rower:*A 25-ton aphract “destroyer” with two banks of oars, 23 upper and 22 lower per side, each rowed by one rower, creating an oar system with two rowers per file. It has a length of 90’, beam of 13’9”, and a draft of 2’6”. It requires 5 sailors and 90 rowers and can carry 10 marines. It has a cargo capacity of 1,000 st. It can carry 2 war machines weighing up to 200 st each. A cataphract (close-decked) 2-rower reduces its oar spring and oar cruise speed by 30’, but can carry 40 marines instead of 10. The chief historical example is the Roman liburnian.
* *2.5-rower:* A 45-ton aphract “light cruiser” with three banks of oars, 12 upper, 24 middle, and 24 lower, each rowed by one rower, creating an oar system with two-and-a-half rowers per file. It has a length of 115’, beam of 19’, and a draft of 2’6”. It requires 10 sailors and 120 rowers and can carry 10 marines. It has a cargo capacity of 1,200 st. It can carry 2 war machines weighing up to 250 st each. Like the 1.5-rower, the 2.5-rower galley’s special oar system enables it to raise, lower, and stow its main mast expeditiously. The 2.5-rower is primarily used as an anti-pirate interceptor, since it can match them for speed and overpower them in manpower. The chief historical example is the Rhodian trihemiola.
* *3-rower:* A 55-ton aphract “cruiser” with three banks of oars, 31 upper, 27 middle, and 27 lower, each rowed by one rower, creating an oar system of three rowers per file. It has a length of 130’, beam of 18’6”, and draft of 3’. It requires 15 sailors and 170 rowers and can carry 15 marines. It has a cargo capacity of 1,500 st. It can carry 2 war machines weighing up to 300 st each. A cataphract 3-rower reduces its oar sprint and oar cruise speed by 30’ but can carry 60 marines. The chief historical example is the Carthaginian, Greek, and Roman trireme.
* *4-rower:* A 65-ton cataphract (closed-deck) “heavy cruiser” with two banks of oars, 23 upper and 22 lower, each rowed by two rowers. It has a length of 120’, beam of 18’6”, and draft of 4’. It is crewed by 15 sailors and 180 rowers and can carry 75 marines. It has a cargo capacity of 2,000 st. It can carry 2 war machines weighing up to 400 st each. The chief historical example is the Hellenistic quadrireme.
* *5-rower:* A 120-ton cataphract “battleship” with three banks of 30 oars, with the upper and middle banks each rowed by two rowers and the lower bank by one rower, creating an oar system with 5 rowers per file. It has a length of 150’, a beam of 17’2”, and a draft of 5’. It requires 20 sailors and 300 rowers and can carry 75 marines. It has a cargo capacity of 5,750 st. It can carry 3 war machines weighing up to 500 st each. The chief historical example is the Hellenistic quinquereme.
* *6-rower:* A 140-ton cataphract “dreadnaught” with three banks of 30 oars, each rowed by two rowers, creating an oar system with six rowers per file. It has a length of 155’, a beam of 25’, and a draft of 6’. It requires 20 sailors and 360 rowers and can carry 100 marines. It has a cargo capacity of 6,000 st. It can carry 4 war machines weighing up to 600 st each. The chief historical example is the Hellenistic sexteres.
* *8-rower:* A 200-ton cataphract “super-dreadnaught” with two banks of oars, 40 upper and 35 lower, each rowed by four rowers, creating an oar system with eight rowers per file. It has a length of 160’, a beam of 33’, and a draft of 8’. It requires 40 sailors and 600 rowers and can carry 150 marines. It has a cargo capacity of 8,000 st. It can carry 7 war machines that weigh up to 800 st each. The chief historical example is the Hellenistic octares.

**Longship:** The longship is a graceful, light ship with a single square-sailed mast, 60’ to 80’ length, 10’ to 15’ beam, and 2’ to 3’ draft. Longships can operate equally well on oceans, coasts, or rivers, making them ideal raiding vessels. The standard crew is a captain and 75 crew, of which 15 are sailors and 60 are rowers. Longship crew are generally also marines. In addition to crew, longships are capable of holding a weight of 2,000 stone (20,000 lbs). A historical example is the Viking drakkar.

**Raft:** The raft is a simple vessel of wooden planks, logs, or reeds, with a 10’ length, 10’ in beam, and 1’ draft. The standard crew is one rower, who poles or paddles the raft. In addition to the rower, rafts can carry a weight of 150 stone (1,500 lbs). Larger rafts can be constructed from 10’ x 10’ segments, each requiring 1 rower and able to carry 150 stone of cargo.

**Sailing Ship:** A sailing ship is a large, seaworthy vessel intended to carry cargo and passengers across the high seas. Compared to galleys, they are much sturdier and have much smaller crews, owing to their lack of oars. That same lack makes them ill-suited to naval warfare, where they are easily outmaneuvered and destroyed.

* *Small:* The small sailing ship is a 75-ton one-masted square-sailed vessel with a 75’ length, 24’ beam, and 5’ draft. It requires 12 sailors to crew and can carry 10,000 stone (100,000 lbs) of cargo. Historical examples include the Roman corbita, the Viking knarr, and the medieval cog.
* *Large:* The large sailing ship is a 200-ton three-masted square-sailed vessel with a 100’ length, 25’ beam, and 10’ draft. It has at least one full deck below the weather deck, and deck castles fore and stern. The forecastle usually contains living quarters for the crew, while the sterncastle contains cabins and mess for the captain and his officers. It requires 20 sailors to crew and can carry 30,000 stone (300,000 lbs) of cargo. It can carry two war machines, one on each deck castle, each weighing up to 800 st each. Historical examples include the Roman cladivata and the medieval round ship.
* *Huge:* The huge sailing ship is a 400-ton three-masted square-sailed vessel with a 115’ length, 33’ beam, and 12’6” draft. It has at least two full decks below the weather deck, and deck castles fore and stern as on the large ship. It requires 40 sailors to crew and can carry 50,000 stone (500,000 lbs) of cargo. It can carry four war machines, two on each deck castle, each weighing up to 1200 st each. Historical examples include the Roman grain freighters of Classical Antiquity.

###### War Machine (Artillery) Descriptions

**Ballista:** A ballista is a two-armed siege weapon, powered either by tension (composite bow) or torsion spring mechanisms, which hurls large spear-like bolts or pellets. Historical examples of light ballista include the Greek oxybeles and Roman scorpio. Historical examples of heavy ballistas include the Roman ballista and medieval springald.

Light and medium ballista can damage creatures or wooden structures, but cannot damage stone. Heavy ballista can damage creatures, wood, and stone.

**Ballista, Heavy Harpoon:** A heavy harpoon ballista is an advanced torsion naval weapon with a large winch fastened to its frame. It fires a 12’ long iron-shod dart with a spiked iron grapnel on one end and a long length of rope on the other. The rope is spooled around the winch before firing. The grapnel dart is fired at enemy vessels, to which it secures itself either by its spike or hooks. The winch is then cranked back, bringing the two ships closed together to enable boarding. Cranking a heavy harpoon ballista’s winch requires a full round action by its crew. The ballista cannot be reloaded during this time. The chief historical example is the Roman harpax.

**Ballista, Repeating:** A repeating ballista is an advanced tension-powered siege weapon that uses a mechanical chain drive to automatically reload its javelin-like bolts into the firing slot after each shot is fired. Historical examples include the Greek polybolos and Roman repeating ballista.

The magazine for the repeating ballista holds 20 bolts. Because of its complexity, a repeating ballista is prone to malfunctions. A malfunction occurs whenever the crew’s attack throw is an unmodified 1. A malfunction takes 1 turn for a siege engineer to repair, during which time the ballista cannot be fired.

**Catapult:** A catapult is a one-armed tension- or torsion-powered siege engine which hurls rocks, burning pitch, or other projectiles from a sling or spoon attached to its throwing arm. Historical examples include the Greek katapeltes, Roman onager and medieval mangonel.

All catapults can damage creatures, wood, and stone. Catapults have difficulty striking small, fast-moving creatures, however. They suffer a -4 penalty to attack throws against man-sized creatures and a -2 penalty to attack throws against large (ogre-sized) creatures. They suffer an additional -1 penalty to attack throws per 10’ of distance the creature has moved this round.

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| Fuel Remaining | Explosion |
| 5 lbs or less | 1d6 fire in 5’ radius |
| 6 lbs – 89 lbs | 2d6 fire in 10’ radius |
| 90 lbs or more | 3d6 fire in 15’ radius |

**Fire-Bearing Siphon:** A fire-bearing siphon is an advanced naval weapon consisting of a double-cylinder force pump connected by a bronze pipe to a 100 lb bronze reservoir connected to a bronze siphon mounted on a swivel and ending in a narrow nozzle. A lamp is mounted below the nozzle while a brazier is positioned below the reservoir inside a bronze case. To use the device, the reservoir is first filled with military oil while the brazier and lamp are filled with common oil and lit. Some of the crew then begin to impel the force pump to squirt the heated military oil through the bronze siphon and out the nozzle, where it is ignited by the lamp. Another crew member swivels the siphon to direct a 5’ wide stream of flaming oil to a range of 60’. Any vessel in the area of effect automatically takes 5d6 fire damage and is set aflame. The flames burn for 5 rounds, dealing 4d6, 3d6, 2d6, and 1d6 additional fire damage at the end of each subsequent round. In addition, any creature in the area of effect must make a Blast saving throw. If the save fails, the creature takes 1d8 fire damage immediately and another 1d8 fire damage at the end of its next initiative. If the save succeeds, the creature takes 1d3 fire damage. Each attack consumes 5 lbs of military oil (one flask of military oil counts as 1 lb). A fire-bearing siphon cannot be used in rainy conditions. If the siphon is destroyed while the brazier is lit, the military oil within explodes. The damage and radius of the explosion is determined by the remaining fuel. The chief historical example is the Byzantine fire-bearing siphon.

**Trebuchet:** A trebuchet is a one-armed siege engine which hurls rocks, burning pitch, and other projectiles from a sling affixed to a long throwing arm. Historical examples include the Byzantine cheiromangana, and the medieval couillard, brigola, and fenevol. Trebuchets can be powered by traction (via men pulling on the throwing arm) or by gravity (via counterweight mechanisms fixed to the throwing arm). Traction trebuchets are simpler and less expensive (reduce cost by 20%) but counterweight trebuchets are more precise (+2 to attack throws). Trebuchets have the same benefits and drawbacks as catapults when targeting creatures and structures.

###### War Machine (Naval Machine) Descriptions

**Boarding Bridge:** A naval machine designed to allow marines to board an enemy vessel. It consists of a tall mast surmounted by a pulley connected by a swiveling hinge to a 36’ long, 4’ wide gangway with a 2’ tall railing on either side. The upper face has a large iron ring to which the rope leading back to the pull is attached. The bottom face of the end of the gangway is surmounted by a huge iron spike, which fastens the gangway to the deck of the enemy vessel. A boarding bridge weighs 250 st and has AC 1 and 2 shp. Because of its cumbersome weight and height, a boarding bridge imposes a -6 penalty to Seafaring proficiency throws to move in storms. See the **Voyages** chapter (p. XX) for rules on using a boarding bridge in combat. The chief historical example is the Roman corvus.

**Boarding Ramp:** A sturdy 20’ long, 3’ wide wooden gangway designed to allow marines to board an enemy vessel. A boarding ramp weighs 40 st and has AC 0 and 1 shp. It is typically carried by a crew of two man-sized characters. See the **Voyages** chapter (p. XX) for rules on using a boarding ramp in combat.

**Bulwark:** A battlemented extension of a vessel’s hull designed to protect the vessel’s sailors and marines from enemy missile fire. Missile attacks targeting the defenders suffer a -2 penalty, while the defenders gain a +2 bonus to Blast saving throws caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects. The bonus does not stack with that afforded by towers. Because it makes the vessel more top-heavy, a bulwark imposes a -2 penalty to Seafaring proficiency throws to move in storms. A bulwark’s cost is 5% of the cost of the vessel onto which it is fitted. A vessel that has been fitted with a bulwark increases its structural hit points by 5%.

**Fire Pot Pole:** An incendiary weapon consisting of 20’ long pole fastened on either side of a vessel’s prow, from which is slung a funnel-shaped pot of burning oil. When an enemy vessel comes within range, the fire pot’s operator twists the pole and dumps fire on the enemy. See the **Voyages** chapter (p. XX) for rules on using a fire pot pole in combat.

**Naval Ram:** A weapon fitted to a galley for use in disabling or sinking enemy vessels. The galley’s bow is extended below the water line, reinforced with heavy timbers, and armored with a bronze casing. A typical ram is 7’5” in length and weighs 1,025 lbs, though the size varies depending on its vessel’s tonnage. A ram’s cost is 10% of the cost of the vessel onto which its fitted.

**Tower, Large:** A defensive structure erected on the deck of a cataphract vessel, it stands 15’ square at its base, with a single door admitting entrance. Inside a ladder leads up 16’ to the rooftop fighting platform, which is surrounded by a 4’ battlement. A large tower’s fighting platform can support up to eight marines or one heavy ballista and crew (400 st total). The height afforded by the tower grants a +1 bonus to attack throws against enemy vessels or marines. The battlement protects the artillery or marines stationed on the fighting platform. Missile attacks targeting the defenders suffer a -4 penalty, while the defenders gain a +4 bonus to Blast saving throws caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects. When placed on a vessel, the large tower counts as two war machines each weighing 600 st. It has AC 1 and 6 shp.

**Tower, Small:** A small defensive structure erected on the deck of a cataphract vessel. The tower is 7.5’ square at its base and the fighting platform is elevated to 8’ with a 4’ battlement. A small tower’s fighting platform can mount up to four marines or a light ballista and crew (100 st total). When placed on a vessel, the small tower counts as one war machine weighing 400 st. It has AC 1 and 2 shp. It is otherwise identical to its larger sibling.

###### War Machine (Siege Engine) Descriptions

**Battering Ram:** A siege engine designed to batter down the walls and gates of strongholds. A typical battering ram consists of a 4,000 lb, 20’ long, 2’ diameter iron-shod log with a wedge-shaped metal head. Larger rams can be built at a cost of 10gp per foot of ram. A battering ram must be crewed with 5 man-sized creatures per 5’. A fully-crewed battering ram has a combat speed of 15’ and a charging/running speed of 45’. When the ram is adjacent to a structure, the crew can batter the structure as a combat action. A ram may batter once every other round. Each blow deals 5d4 shp of damage to wooden structures and 1d4 shp of damage to stone structures. A 20’ ram has AC 2 and 4 shp (1 shp per 5’). For rams with variant dimensions, adjust price, shp, and damage proportionately. Rams can be mounted in movable galleries of sufficient size to provide additional protection to the crew.

**Caltrops:** A 20-ounce bag of spiked caltrops. A typical caltrop has four sharp spikes arranged in a tetrahedron so that when thrown one spike always points up. Caltrops are used to impede movement through areas, particularly by cavalry. One bag of caltrops can be scattered across a 5’ x 5’ area as an action in lieu of attacking. One bag of caltrops can be picked up from a 5’ x 5’ area as a full-round action. Caltrops are easy to spot unless shielded by terrain such as tall grass. Creatures moving at half combat speed or less can move through caltrops safely. Creatures moving at combat speed must succeed on a proficiency throw of 7+ per 5’ of movement through caltrops. Mounts must throw twice per 5’. If more than bag of caltrops has been scattered across the area, there is a -2 penalty on the throw per additional bag. If a creature fails the throw, it steps on a caltrop. Stepping on a caltrop deals 1 piercing damage at combat speed or 1d4 piercing damage at running speed. A charging or running mount that steps on a caltrop also falls **prone** and becomes **incapacitated** until the damage is healed. Its rider must succeed on a Paralysis saving throw or be thrown, suffering 1d6 bludgeoning damage from the impact. Characters with both Mounted Combat and Riding proficiency automatically succeed on this save.

**Cauldron, Suspended:** A 50-gallon cast-iron cauldron mounted over a brazier. During sieges, cauldrons are used to heat sand; melt lead; or boil water, wine, or oil, any of which can be poured over walls or through murder holes to inflict grievous wounds on assaulting troops. The crew of a cauldron can use a full-round action to pour burning fluid to affect all creatures in a 10’ diameter area, or all creatures on a siege ladder. Creatures in the area of effect must make Blast saving throws. If the save succeeds, the creature suffers 1d3 fire damage. If the save fails, the creature suffers 1d8 fire damage immediately and another 1d8 fire damage on the same initiative count the following round. The cauldron weighs 4 stone unfilled and 45 stone filled. The crew must be of sufficient size or strength able to lift the cauldron.

**Fascine:** A large bundle of sticks used to reinforce field fortifications, fill up a moat, or make a path across wet terrain. Fascines can be purchased in 5’ x 5’ x 5’ costing 10gp each and weigh 450 st each. Filling a 100’ x 20’ x 10’ moat would require (20,000 / 125) 160 fascines, costing 1,600gp.

**Hoist:** A siege engine used by assaulting troops to ascend to the top of a wall. It consists of a heavy frame supporting a 30’ long arm. One end of the arm has a large basket for transporting up to 4 man-sized creatures at a time, while the other end has a counterweight heavy enough to lift them. With a full crew of 4 laborers working the winch, it takes 1 round for the basket to ascend or descend. It takes 4 rounds to re-set the counterweight in between each ascent. The basket provides partial cover to the ascending creatures. Missile attacks against them suffer a -2 penalty. Hoists can be mounted in movable galleries or siege towers for mobility. The hoist itself has AC 0 and 5 shp.

**Movable Gallery:** A wheeled carriage with a heavy timber frame used to provide cover for troops operating against a wall. Missile attacks targeting creatures within the gallery suffer a -4 penalty, and the creatures gain a +4 bonus to Blast saving throws caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects. A typical movable gallery measures 12’ tall, 12’ wide, and 20’ long and can protect 20 man-sized creatures. The gallery itself has AC 1 and 10 shp. A movable gallery can mount a battering ram, hoist, or screw (purchased separately). If at least 10 man-sized creatures occupy the gallery, it can move with a combat speed of 15’ and a charging/running speed of 45’. Galleries can be built at a cost of 1gp per square foot. Historical examples include the Roman tortoise and medieval cat.

**Movable Mantlet:** A thick wooden shield mounted on wheels used to shelter assaulting troops from fire as they move towards the besieged stronghold’s walls. Missile attacks targeting creatures shielded by the mantlet suffer a -4 penalty, and the creatures gain a +4 bonus to Blast saving throws caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects. A typical movable mantlet measures 8’ tall by 6’ wide and can protect 2 man-sized creatures, who can move it at a combat speed of 15’ and a charging/running speed of 45’. The mantlet itself has AC 1 and 1 shp. The shield of the mantlet features slits to allow archery fire. Historical examples include the medieval mantlet and Mughal turah.

**Petard:** A crude bomb used to breach stronghold walls. Petards have a slow fuse that must be lit with a match, a risky proposition. Lighting the fuse requires a Siege Engineering proficiency throw of 6+. A successful throw indicates the petard will detonate in 1d4 rounds. A failed throw indicates the fuse has not been lit. A fumble occurs if the proficiency throw is an unmodified 1. A fumble results in the immediate detonation of the petard. When detonated, a 1 lb petard does 1d6 seismic damage to all creatures with 5’. A 6 lb petard deals 2d6 seismic damage to all creatures within 10’. An 18 lb petard deals 3d6 seismic damage to all creatures within 15’. A 40 lb petard deals 4d6 seismic damage to all creatures within 20’. Creatures may make a Blast saving throw to reduce the damage by half. Petards also deal full damage to the structural hit points of ships and buildings. In the Auran Empire campaign setting, only the magic-wary dwarves make and use petards, so they can only be purchased in dwarven vaults.

**Ram Catcher:** Asiege engine used to lift, break, or dislodge battering rams, siege hooks, or screws from the walls. The device consists of a grappling hook mounted at the end of a long beam or thick rope. To use a ram catcher, its wielder must succeed on an attack throw against the ram with a -4 penalty. The ram must then make a successful Paralysis saving throw. (A ram or other crewed engine always saves as the lowest level member of its crew.) If the saving throw fails, the ram is dislodged and takes 1d6 shp of damage.

**Screw:** A siege engine designed to bore a hole into a stronghold’s walls. A typical screw consists of a 20’ long iron-shod log with a screw or bore head affixed to the tip. Larger screws can be built at a cost of 10gp per foot. A screw must be crewed with 2-5 man-sized creatures per 5’. A fully-crewed battering ram has a combat speed of 15’ and a charging/running speed of 45’. Once brought adjacent to a structure, the screw can start boring into the structure. A screw bores once every other round. Each bore deals 3d10 shp of damage to wooden structures and 1d4+1 shp of damage to stone structures. A 20’ bore has AC 2 and 4 shp (1 shp per 5’). For bores with variant dimensions, adjust price, shp, and damage proportionately. Screws can be mounted in movable galleries of sufficient size to provide additional protection to the crew. Historical examples include the bore, pick, and sow.

**Siege Hook:** A siege engine designed to pull defenders from a wall during a siege. It consists of a long wooden beam mounted with a sickle-shaped blade. To use a siege hook, its wielder must succeed on an attack throw against the target creature with a -4 penalty. (The attack throw must also be modified by any cover the target enjoys from battlements, etc.) The target creature must then make a successful Paralysis saving throw. If the saving throw fails, the creature is knocked off the wall, and suffers 1d6 bludgeoning damage per 10’ fallen.

**Siege Ladder:** A ladder used by assaulting troops to scale a stronghold’s walls or ramparts, an act known as escalade. Most siege ladders are simply long pieces of timber with crosspieces set upon them. Creatures may move up siege ladders at one quarter their normal speed. A creature defending the walls can push a siege ladder away with a successful proficiency throw to open doors. Each man-sized creature on the ladder imposes a -1 penalty to the proficiency throw.

|  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Siege Tower Characteristics** | | | |
| **Characteristics** | **Standard** | **Large** | **Huge** |
| Base | 20’ | 40’ | 65’ |
| Height | 40’ | 90’ | 135’ |
| Stories | 4 | 6 | 9 |
| Internal Crew | 12 | 60 | 200 |
| External Crew | 108 | 420 | 1,000 |
| Total Troops | 60 | 360 | 1,080 |
| Total Siege Engines | 400 st | 800 st | 1,600 st |
| Armor Class | 0 | 1 | 2 |
| Structural Hit points | 50 | 200 | 550 |

**Siege Tower:** A mobile tower designed to protect assaulting troops during the approach to a stronghold, then get them over the walls by means of a gangplank or hoist. A siege tower consists of a multi-story wooden frame built over a huge carriage with wheels mounted in casters. The frame is then covered with iron or animal skins to protect it from flame. Missile attacks targeting creatures within the siege tower suffer a -4 penalty, and the creatures gain a +4 bonus to saving throws versus Blast caused by artillery, burning oil, or similar effects. If properly crewed, a siege tower can be moved (as a full-round action by its crew) 20’ per round.

A standard siege tower is 20’ square at the base. It has four stories, at 10’, 20’, 30’, and 40’ in height. The top floor, at 40’ height, is surrounded by a 10’ square parapet. The third floor, at 30’ height, features a 10’ drawbridge. The second and first floor are at 10’ and 20’ height respectively. Each floor can carry siege engine and crew weighing up to 400 st. Beneath the first floor is a capstan where a crew of 12 man-sized creatures pushes the tower. In addition, a standard siege tower can carry 60 man-sized troops.

A large siege tower is 40’ square at the base. It has six stories, at 15’, 30’, 45’, 60’, 75’, and 90’. The top floor, at 90’ height, is surrounded by a 20’ square parapet. The fifth floor, at 75’ height, features a 10’ drawbridge. Each floor can carry up to two siege engines with crew weighing up to 800 st total. Beneath the first floor is a capstan where a crew of 60 man-sized creatures pushes the tower. In addition, a large siege tower can carry up to 360 man-sized troops. Historical examples of large siege towers include the Roman towers used at Masada.

A huge siege tower is 65’ square at the base. It has nine stories, at 15’, 30’, 45’, 60’, 75’, 90’, 105’, 120’, and 135’. The top floor, at 135’ height, is surrounded by a 30’ square parapet. The fifth floor, at 75’, features a 10’ drawbridge. Each floor can carry up to four siege engines with crew weighing up to 1600 st total. The capstan below the first floor requires a crew of 200 man-sized creatures to push the tower. In addition, a huge siege tower can carry up to 1,080 man-sized troops. A historical example of a huge tower is Helepolis (“City Taker”), used by Demetrius during the siege of Rhodes.

Siege towers all require a large number of external crew to move the tower. A small siege tower requires 108 external crew. A large siege tower requires 420 external crew. A huge siege tower requires 1,000 external crew. External crew generally stand outside the tower and pull it with ropes. If available, draft animals or exotic creatures can substitute for external crew. For every 10 stone of normal load, the creature counts as 1 external crew.

EXAMPLE: An ox or heavy draft horse (normal load 40 stone) can substitute for 4 external crew. A medium draft horse (normal load 30 stone) can substitute for 3 external crew. A mule (normal load 20 stone) can substitute for 2 external crew. If a trained giant tiger beetle (normal load 250 stone) were available, it could substitute for 25 external crew!
