## Spell Signatures

While spells have general effects that are common to all who cast them, the specific sensory effects associated with the spell inevitably vary from caster to caster. This specific sensory effect is known as the **spell signature**.The player of a spellcaster can write a short description of the signature for his caster or detailed descriptions of the signature of each spell, as he desires. For arcane spellcasters, the signature might be based on a particular school or style of magic, or simply be a reflection of the spellcaster’s personal taste. For divine spellcasters, the signature should reflect the caster’s relationship with his deity. A character’s choice of proficiencies can be suggestive of appropriate spell signatures.

EXAMPLE: Sargon pursues necromantic magic and has the Black Lore of Zahar proficiency. His player decides that all of Sargon’s spell signatures will revolve around death. His *mage missiles*appear as shards of bone. His *slumber* spell places its targets into a nightmarish slumber where they dream of Hell. His *thunderbolt* is crackling blue-black energy. His *wall of stone* has the appearance of tombstones graven with the names of the dead.

A character with the Sensing Power proficiency can sense the spell signature of arcane casters up to 24 hours after a spell has been cast. A caster who casts *scry* can inadvertently reveal his spell signature to those he scries upon. A caster who casts *reveal ritual magic* can discern the spell signature of whoever is casting the ritual. A character can make a Collegiate Wizardry proficiency throw to identify famous casters or particular schools of magic by their spell signature. A character can make a Theology proficiency throw to identify famous religious orders by their spell signature.
